{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1187\cocoasubrtf370
{\fonttbl\f0\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{circle\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid2\'01\uc0\u9702 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listname ;}\listid1}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}}
{\info
{\title Methods}}\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320

\f0\b\fs48 \cf0 Introduction\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\b0\fs24 \cf0 At its broadest this study asks, "what role does the smartphone play in contemporary social life?". We have examined a range of theories and approaches, from historically-deterministic accounts of Fordism to radical reconfigurations of what constitutes a social actor. This study was not meant to deliver significant or conclusive evidence toward any given understanding of computers or the smartphone; instead, this research was meant to examine reactions to and interactions with these devices at a personal level. As such, the methods chosen for this research were qualitative interviews and autoethnography. This decision was deeply influenced by the research conducted by Sherry Turkle, and by authors academic and decidedly not so. In the following sections, I will explain the rationale for these choices, and the specifics of each methodology.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320

\b\fs48 \cf0 Qualitative Over Quantitative\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\b0\fs24 \cf0 There has been a great deal of quantitative study performed on the habits and usage surrounding computers. However, for the conceits established in the Introduction and following chapters, that body of work is deliberately ignored here. While that research has been useful in studying the patterns established around the devices themselves, it has failed to grasp the causes or sources of these phenomena. Indeed, it is akin to the study of the tides: while understanding the movements and qualities of the waves can tell you a great deal, it fails to comprehend the nature of the source\'97the moon.\
If the Earth is the realm of human relationships, social scientists have indeed cataloged most of its activity. Certainly, there are species and spaces\'97practices and communities\'97which we have yet to study, but we have an understanding of the majority of its contents. However, this study has denied the influence of the solar system. Our moon subtly influences the tides and signals to the surface with its light, our sister planets gently tugging, and the Sun our source of light and life. Beyond that, a universe which dictates our physics and movement through the cosmos. Overwrought and overextended this metaphor may be, but quantitative research exists in a state prior to the Copernican moment\'97the realisation of forces imperceptible and utterly inhuman shape our lives.\
With respect to computers, we are in the early days of that revelatory moment. Science, Technology, and Society studies are a burgeoning discipline in which a great deal has been accomplished. I do not mean to suggest that this study is somehow superior; instead, it is meant to move away from the examination of epistemology and the study of studies, and toward an theorisation and conceptualisation of the quotidian or mundane interactions that take place between humans and computers. It is for these reasons that Turkle's methodology and underpinning rationale was so important to my research design and the larger study.\
In describing her methodology, Turkle introduces herself in the role of outsider; never having used a computer, the realm of programming and computation was utterly foreign to her. To this, she stated: "this book is a product of something that anthropologists call 
\i d\'e9paysement
\i0 , which refers to the dislocation and change of perspective that makes being a stranger in a foreign place both difficult and exciting." (2005:303). For her, understanding the phenomena observed necessitated interview not to understand the psychology of the individual, but the patterns of belief and understanding which underpinned those experiences (2005:306). This allowed her to create her eventual framework of classification, but also allowed a greater understanding of the society and culture which had cultivated these human-machine relationships. Such a process was perfect for exploring the basis of our present technological moral panic.\
One critical difference between myself and Turkle, however, is that sense of being on the outside and looking in. As is made somewhat apparent by the experiences I've shared throughout this study, I am not an outsider. Just the opposite, in fact. To virtually anyone who has met me, I am an inveterate technologist and rabid futurist. I am a first-adopter, the point of the blade on the bleeding edge. I am a member of the information technology vanguard, and unabashedly so. And so one wonders: how could I possibly remove myself from this subculture, to examine and analyse and report objectively? I don't.\
The past decades have seen a transformation in culture. As computers and information technology have become more widespread in society, so have the subcultures that surrounded those technologies. While examining that charge is far outside the scope of this study, the casual evidence is clear: cyborgs run rampant in popular culture (e.g. the 
\i Terminator
\i0  series of films, the 
\i Mass Effect
\i0  video game franchise, both runaway successes). It is here that I turn not only to the academic tradition of writers like Baudrillard and Haraway, but the nonacademic tradition of countercultural writing in the United States. With respect to Baudrillard and Haraway, it was made clear that academic analysis did not necessitate truth or consistency; instead, contradictions and relations became the focus, and greater social truths might be understood in such a fashion. I will again emphasise the importance of empirical research, but I believe self-conscious autoethnography to be a powerful asset for broadening the horizons of social theory.\
Secondary to those academic influences is the genre of science fiction. A major departure from conventional academic writing, it nonetheless played a substantial role in the design of the autoethnographic methods used in this study for two reasons. First, the nexus between science fiction and technological innovations in real life is tighter than ever. While all science fiction suffers from imperfections in its prediction of the future and its innovations, those imperfections are becoming ever-more minute. As "nerd" culture\'97the culture of the technologically proficient and computer-users\'97has slowly overtaken mainstream culture, the ideas and concepts presented through science fiction media have become closer and closer. Dr. Martin Cooper, the man responsible for the cellphone, directly cited the "Communicator"\'97a wireless communication device which debuted on the television programme 
\i Star Trek
\i0 \'97as the genesis of his invention. The same can be said for the now-commmonplace notion of cyberspace; the science fiction author coined and popularised the term through his writing the 1980's, and eventually became the source of inspiration for the virtual worlds such as Second Life, and the contemporary online social networks (e.g. Facebook). And, finally, even social arrangements: returning to the example of Star Trek, the then-diverse cast was a profound departure from the racially-divided American society of the late 1960's and 70's, justified by the futuristic setting and progressive tone of the program.\
The second part of this influence was the development of social critique in the genre. Good science fiction, it is said, is neither about science, nor fiction: it consists of stories about the present culture and its successes and failings. Allegory and metaphor have long been hallmarks of science fiction, and have been vehicles for social criticism for just as long. Similar things could be said for genre of fantasy, which substitutes outright magic for the vaguely plausible, but science fiction was uniquely suited to examine the rapid spread of information technologies from the 1960's onward. The worlds examined by Philip K. Dick, William Gibson, and countless others exemplify the fear and paranoia pertaining to surveillance, consumerism, and countless other themes. Long before teenagers sexting on the evening news as the herald of the moral panic around technology, science fiction was exploring and critiquing ruthlessly\'97providing later critics like Haraway the concepts necessary to relate and explain not only a new, technological state of being but a revolutionary ideology in the tradition of Marx.\
And so I feel it vitally important to this study to include my experiences with and around the technologies which hang over us, imminent and eminently foreboding behind a glossy, consumptive sheen. They are not included to demonstrate truths; they are present to give life and feeling to moments which crystallise the theories explored here. They are deeply personal, as much of this study is. From the theorists examined in Chapter Two, I carry an awareness of the place and role of technologies in my life. While my position is atypical, it is that of the leading edge\'97the edge thrust ahead of the rest of the blade as it moves through time, propelled by ongoing and incessant innovation. To borrow a byline, these stories are the stories from 20 minutes into the future. For all these reasons, autoethnography is central to the functioning of this text as I intend it.\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa320

\b\fs48 \cf0 Methodologies in Detail\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280

\fs36 \cf0 Qualitative Individual Interviews\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720
\ls1\ilvl0
\b0\fs24 \cf0 {\listtext	\'95	}participant solicitation\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}public postings\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}contact price\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\'95	}interview format\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}instrument design\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}interview context (e.g. location)\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}recording medium\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}consent form/follow-up survey\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\'95	}analysis\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440
\ls1\ilvl1\cf0 {\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}transcription\
{\listtext	\uc0\u9702 	}analysis w/ respect to Turkle's research\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa280

\b\fs36 \cf0 Autoethnography\
\pard\pardeftab720\sa240

\i\b0\fs24 \cf0 I feel that I've covered much of the rationale behind the use of autoethnography in the first section, but what is there to say for methodology? My personal process of collecting, cataloging, and writing autoethnographies to focus on particular themes or relationships?
\i0 \
}