# Introduction

At its broadest this study asks, "what role does the smartphone play in contemporary social life?". We have examined a range of theories and approaches, from historically-deterministic accounts of Fordism to radical reconfigurations of what constitutes a social actor. This study was not meant to deliver significant or conclusive evidence toward any given understanding of computers or the smartphone; instead, this research was meant to examine reactions to and interactions with these devices at a personal level. As such, the methods chosen for this research were qualitative interviews and autoethnography. This decision was deeply influenced by the research conducted by Sherry Turkle, and by authors academic and decidedly not so. In the following sections, I will explain the rationale for these choices, and the specifics of each methodology.

# Qualitative Over Quantitative

There has been a great deal of quantitative study performed on the habits and usage surrounding computers. However, for the conceits established in the Introduction and following chapters, that body of work is deliberately ignored here. While that research has been useful in studying the patterns established around the devices themselves, it has failed to grasp the causes or sources of these phenomena. Indeed, it is akin to the study of the tides: while understanding the movements and qualities of the waves can tell you a great deal, it fails to comprehend the nature of the source—the moon. 

If the Earth is the realm of human relationships, social scientists have indeed cataloged most of its activity. Certainly, there are species and spaces—practices and communities—which we have yet to study, but we have an understanding of the majority of its contents. However, this study has denied the influence of the solar system. Our moon subtly influences the tides and signals to the surface with its light, our sister planets gently tugging, and the Sun our source of light and life. Beyond that, a universe which dictates our physics and movement through the cosmos. Overwrought and overextended this metaphor may be, but quantitative research exists in a state prior to the Copernican moment—the realisation of forces imperceptible and utterly inhuman shape our lives.

With respect to computers, we are in the early days of that revelatory moment. Science, Technology, and Society studies are a burgeoning discipline in which a great deal has been accomplished. I do not mean to suggest that this study is somehow superior; instead, it is meant to move away from the examination of epistemology and the study of studies, and toward an theorisation and conceptualisation of the quotidian or mundane interactions that take place between humans and computers. It is for these reasons that Turkle's methodology and underpinning rationale was so important to my research design and the larger study.

In describing her methodology, Turkle introduces herself in the role of outsider; never having used a computer, the realm of programming and computation was utterly foreign to her. To this, she stated: "this book is a product of something that anthropologists call *dépaysement*, which refers to the dislocation and change of perspective that makes being a stranger in a foreign place both difficult and exciting." (2005:303). For her, understanding the phenomena observed necessitated interview not to understand the psychology of the individual, but the patterns of belief and understanding which underpinned those experiences (2005:306). This allowed her to create her eventual framework of classification, but also allowed a greater understanding of the society and culture which had cultivated these human-machine relationships. Such a process was perfect for exploring the basis of our present technological moral panic.

One critical difference between myself and Turkle, however, is that sense of being on the outside and looking in. As is made somewhat apparent by the experiences I've shared throughout this  study, I am not an outsider. Just the opposite, in fact. To virtually anyone who has met me, I am an inveterate technologist and rabid futurist. I am a first-adopter, the point of the blade on the bleeding edge. I am a member of the information technology vanguard, and unabashedly so. And so one wonders: how could I possibly remove myself from this subculture, to examine and analyse and report objectively? I don't.

The past decades have seen a transformation in culture. As computers and information technology have become more widespread in society, so have the subcultures that surrounded those technologies. While examining that charge is far outside the scope of this study, the casual evidence is clear: cyborgs run rampant in popular culture (e.g. the *Terminator* series of films, the *Mass Effect* video game franchise, both runaway successes). It is here that I turn not only to the academic tradition of writers like Baudrillard and Haraway, but the nonacademic tradition of countercultural writing in the United States. With respect to Baudrillard and Haraway, it was made clear that academic analysis did not necessitate truth or consistency; instead, contradictions and relations became the focus, and greater social truths might be understood in such a fashion. I will again emphasise the importance of empirical research, but I believe self-conscious autoethnography to be a powerful asset for broadening the horizons of social theory.

Secondary to those academic influences is the genre of science fiction. A major departure from conventional academic writing, it nonetheless played a substantial role in the design of the autoethnographic methods used in this study for two reasons. First, the nexus between science fiction and technological innovations in real life is tighter than ever. While all science fiction suffers from imperfections in its prediction of the future and its innovations, those imperfections are becoming ever-more minute. As "nerd" culture—the culture of the technologically proficient and computer-users—has slowly overtaken mainstream culture, the ideas and concepts presented through science fiction media have become closer and closer. Dr. Martin Cooper, the man responsible for the cellphone, directly cited the "Communicator"—a wireless communication device which debuted on the television programme *Star Trek*—as the genesis of his invention. The same can be said for the now-commonplace notion of cyberspace; the science fiction author coined and popularised the term through his writing the 1980's, and eventually became the source of inspiration for the virtual worlds such as Second Life, and the contemporary online social networks (e.g. Facebook). And, finally, even social arrangements: returning to the example of Star Trek, the then-diverse cast was a profound departure from the racially-divided American society of the late 1960's and 70's, justified by the futuristic setting and progressive tone of the program.

The second part of this influence was the development of social critique in the genre. Good science fiction, it is said, is neither about science, nor fiction: it consists of stories about the present culture and its successes and failings. Allegory and metaphor have long been hallmarks of science fiction, and have been vehicles for social criticism for just as long. Similar things could be said for genre of fantasy, which substitutes outright magic for the vaguely plausible, but science fiction was uniquely suited to examine the rapid spread of information technologies from the 1960's onward. The worlds examined by Philip K. Dick, William Gibson, and countless others exemplify the fear and paranoia pertaining to surveillance, consumerism, and countless other themes. Long before teenagers sexting on the evening news as the herald of the moral panic around technology, science fiction was exploring and critiquing ruthlessly—providing later critics like Haraway the concepts necessary to relate and explain not only a new, technological state of being but a revolutionary ideology in the tradition of Marx.

And so I feel it vitally important to this study to include my experiences with and around the technologies which hang over us, imminent and eminently foreboding behind a glossy, consumptive sheen. They are not included to demonstrate truths; they are present to give life and feeling to moments which crystallise the theories explored here. They are deeply personal, as much of this study is. From the theorists examined in Chapter Two, I carry an awareness of the place and role of technologies in my life. While my position is atypical, it is that of the leading edge—the edge thrust ahead of the rest of the blade as it moves through time, propelled by ongoing and incessant innovation. To borrow a byline, these stories are the stories from 20 minutes into the future. For all these reasons, autoethnography is central to the functioning of this text as I intend it.

# Methodologies in Detail

## Autoethnography

The autoethnographic portions of this study were taken not as an attempt to factually recount events—instead, they were meant to convey the sensations and experiences relevant to the subject matter at hand. Indeed, Haraway's writing proved to be extremely influential in this process: rather than conveying an exact truth, the intent was to instead elaborate upon the larger narrative being told through theory. As a self-professed member of a subculture which for all purposes appears to be on a rising trajectory, these anecdotes hopefully convey the subjective truth of coming relationships between computers and humans, rather than objective facts about existing arrangements.

## Qualitative Individual Interviews

Given the ethnographic influences described above, the interviews of this research were designed to encourage open and casual discussion of information technology use and participants' attitudes and perceptions toward smartphones and other computers. As such, most interactions with participants were conducted informally and with minimal structure. Participant solicitation was designed to begin with convenience sampling, then to expand into snowball sampling. While probability sampling might have offered greater diversity in the sample population, there was also the distinct possibility of the interviews becoming too formal—thereby precluding open or honest conversation regarding the topics and themes at hand. The alternative—convenience sampling followed by snowball sampling—helped establish rapport and a degree of familiarity between myself and the potential participants. This resulted in participation solicitation taking place by two means: an open and publicly-visible event created on the Facebook social network, and by contacting individuals who had posted or written in public media about their attempts to restrict or limit their technology use.

### Participant Solicitation

While the first means of solicitation was a slight variation on standard interview solicitation, I understood the second to be something of a departure. I decided to proceed with this method for several reasons. As was discussed in the second theory chapter, Turkle placed heavy emphasis on "technology diets" throughout the second part of *Alone Together*; while that behaviour is generally seen as uncommon, it had begun to gather momentum within the programmer/"nerd" subculture which is heavily technologised. By contacting authors who had undertaken these experiments or technology use restriction, it was my intent to examine and compare attitudes regarding technology use and technology "addiction" between "normals" and the members of the aforementioned subculture. A number of these individuals were contacted on a case-by-case basis: some were easily reached via email, others by casual relationships established on the Twitter social network, and one by conventional mail correspondence. While these authors had publicly discussed their experiences, it was made clear in the initial contacts that their participation would be kept confidential so as to encourage the sharing of experiences perhaps not fit for publishing under their own names.

The rest of the participants were first contacted via a publicly visible event created on Facebook. An initial group of potential participants were invited to the event, and were encouraged to invite others. In the description of the event and my research, a note regarding a raffle of gift cards to popular chain restaurants was included. Those invited were instructed to mark themselves as "Attending" the event, and were strongly encouraged to post any particular experiences with information technologies or motivations to participate in the research on the event page. I chose to encourage these small narratives to, again, establish an informal tone and to give myself some basic criteria for interviewing a sample with a breadth of experiences.

Within hours of the event's creation and the inviting of the initial potential sample, the response was staggering. Tens of individuals had marked themselves as attending, posted their narratives, and invited their peers to participate. Interactions between potential participants on the event page (e.g. comments, discussion), with respect to their narratives, was common. I regularly re-visited the event page to interact with potential participants and to check progress. In two days' time after the initial posting, more than one hundred individuals had marked themselves as attending, and dozens of narratives had been posted. I then began to sort for individuals who had been particularly engaged, or had unique or unusual narratives to broaden the range of potential sample data.

Once I had sorted this pool of potential participants, I began to contact each via Facebook's internal messaging system or via email. A basic script was followed in each initial contact, though interactions began to diverge immediately thereafter as I explained the interview procedure and scheduled interview times. Schedule conflicts were not uncommon, but the size of the potential sample population facilitated the scheduling of enough interviews for a robust data set. Interviews were scheduled to take place within private rooms in public buildings on the college's campus (e.g. Lowry Center, Andrews and Gault Libraries), or, in the case of participants who were not geographically proximate, through electronic communication mediums (e.g. telephone, Skype). In the cases of those interviewed via electronic mediums, I expressed a preference for video calls via Skype so as to encourage a more straightforward or casual environment. However, specific accommodations were made given each participant's preferences or availability. 

Before each interview, participants had the opportunity to read—or have read to them—the entirety of the consent form, upon which they consented to the research by signing the form. All of the interviews were recorded using a digital recorder capable of taking input from its surroundings—or a computer or phone via audio output. After each interview, the participant was asked to fill out a short exit survey which gathered basic demographic information; this data was collected to provide additional insight if any significant patterns became apparent. For analysis, interview recordings were transcribed, anonymised, and coded to find recurring themes, beliefs, or opinions. Upon transcription, these recordings were deleted then securely overwritten. 

### Instrument Design & Analysis

As was mentioned above, the interviews were designed to be as relaxed and informal as possible without losing coherence or points of comparison between participants' responses. Unlike Turkle's primarily inductive, ethnographic observations in *Alone Together* and *The Second Self*, I had several hypotheses in mind when designing my qualitative interview instrument:

> *a) those raised with information technology are optimistic and enthusiastic toward the spread of technology, while those without those experiences, less so.*

> *b) as an individual's experience and comfort with using computers grows, their understanding of computers trends toward that of "unpunctuated" tools.*

> *c) negative experiences or views of technology are closely tied to specific devices or services (e.g. an old phone, email).*

These hypotheses are largely drawn from Turkle's findings, discussed in the above theory sections. To test these hypotheses, the interview prompt was broken into topical sections: formative experiences with technology; present technology use; negative experiences and associations with technology, and related coping mechanisms; and a final debrief. The first three sections correspond to the hypotheses listed above; the final debrief was included to encourage elaboration on the narratives shared during the solicitation process, free discussion of the study and my findings up to that point, and an opportunity to predict what a smartphone—or any other roughly equivalent device—might look like in five, ten, or fifteen years.

These methods were casual and unstructured with specific intent: to freely explore the theories and concepts examined in the above chapters. Turkle's background in clinical psychology was well-suited to this style of ethnography, and developing a fully-featured understanding of individuals' psychology relating to computers is frankly beyond the scope of this study, or undergraduate sociology. Instead, these methods function as a test bed for the theories discussed here. Given the exploratory and foundational nature of this study, these methods seemed appropriate. 