


The regime of accumulation, left unchecked, invariably resulted in overproduction and economic failure. John Kenneth Galbraith, in his analysis of the hyper-productive post-war American economy, traced the series of economic depressions which seized the United States through the 19th and 20th centuries. Indeed, as the severity of depressions grew, there was general disquiet in the field of economics: if booms and busts were normal, then how defensible was the system?


In the years following the war, theorists and economists were generally bullish with respect to the ever-increasing productive output of the industrialised world. However, the problems of over-production were fresh in others' minds. *The Affluent Society*, John Kenneth Galbraith's analysis of post-war American society, picked up on these concerns. While Galbraith was loath to be identified with Marxism or Marxian economics, he understood production's role as base both in social relations and critical discourse. However, 

Galbraith was dead-set against Marxian analysis, but he understood the prevailing mindset of the period: production was the end-all, be-all of a nation's well-being, and all other social forces were the end results of capitalist industry and production at unprecedented scales. Galbraith's analysis focusses on the inevitable problems of success and production (e.g. marginal profits and declining demand), but in reading the text it is clear how thoroughly Fordism had permeated the social mindset. Galbraith speaks of a "New Class" which was meant to escape the dull and demeaning work of industrial production toward careers that were fulfilling and meaningful. Work weeks were declining as a consequence of growing productivity and the emphasis was no longer placed on production and acquisition of necessary commodities, but on the "rewards and importance of leisure" (Galbraith 1998:243). It is here that another fundamental transition was taking place. While public and theoretical discourse was concerned with production almost exclusively, the actual engines of economic activity were reconfiguring themselves. While the United States had been amply able to supply the rest of the Western world's needs after the war, the recovering economies of Europe were resulting in over-production and rapid decreases in marginal productivity. Indeed, rather than satiating the fundamental needs of a society, "productive energies [were] used to make things of no great urgency—things for which demand must be synthesised at elaborate cost lest they not be wanted" (Galbraith 1998:217). In this historical moment, the value of the individual was transitioning from their productive capacity to their consumptive capacity. The consumer society was born.

While Galbraith was reluctant to engage in a more strident critique of the new social order, Jean Baudrillard was adamant. *The Consumer Society* suffers from a number of flaws—Baudrillard freely intermixes his nascent postmodern semiotics with structural functionalism and Marxism—but it is a landmark work. George Ritzer, author of the introduction to the English translation of the text, was right in pointing out "the sense, in this work, both explicitly and implicitly, that production is the base and all else, including consumption and the culture of which it is such an integral part, is superstructure" (Baudrillard 1998: KL 90–91). Despite production's status as the lingua franca, so to speak, *The Consumer Society* brilliantly conceptualises the transition from "the individual as worker" to "the individual as consumer".

The introduction of structural functionalism would at first seem to run counter to the intentions of this otherwise-Marxist analysis, but Baudrillard effectively manages the two frames alongside one another. 

*Aglietta rejected the consumer society: "There is no such thing as a consumer society, but there certainly is a universal extension of the capitalist mode of production in the social formations in which it is implanted" (1979:81)*

*Return to Wolff's account of media consumption and corporate influence on computing in Wired Sep. 2010*

# Accumulation, Concentration, & The Present

*Baudrillard's discussion of structural functionalism betrays the transition from class struggle to structural oppression. Aglietta succinctly theorises the nature of Fordist and Post-Fordist accumulation and concentration, while Crawford provides contemporary examples*

Neo-Fordism: "An articulation between process of production and mode of consumption" (117)

Where Gramsci saw the potential for abuse, Aglietta knew it in detail. Through *A Theory of Capitalist Regulation*, Michel Aglietta performed a rigorous analysis of Fordism's

- Has precedent in Marx (*Capital*: Volume One: Chapter 32: The Historical Tendency of Capitalist Accumulation) and Gramsci (his study of the women of wealthy ruling classes in "Rationalisation of Production and Work").

*The accumulation and centralisation of capital leaves firms larger and better able to dictate the terms of the society. The computer industry—once a cottage industry—would give way to these models as these tools were better recognised as means of extracting value from knowledge work.*

## Susan Crawford, Captive Audience

*Useful example of capital accumulation and concentration in the telecommunications industries, and how the corporation has become the most powerful social organisation in the history of Western civilisation. Neatly ties together Aglietta and Baudrillard's main themes and concepts.*

*Attempts to roll back concentration are consistently met with claims of "smothering innovation" or "killing jobs" (Crawford KL 204). Echoes Galbraith's analysis that the dominant frame of analysis is productivity, though the actual benefits are heightened consumption, a la Baudrillard.*

# The Greek God Model of Governance

When Peter Ludlow wrote *Our Future in Virtual Worlds*, he was concerned with the particulars of online, virtual communities; something of a far cry from our previous examples of telecommunications giants and smartphones. While his usage of "virtual" is problematic (a microchip is not virtual in any sense; it is real and performs complex math toward a specific end), he does establish a number of extremely effective metaphors for understanding our relationship with the large corporate entities which define most if not all of our everyday experiences with smartphones and other information technologies (Ludlow 2010: KL 35).

While the examples given by Ludlow seem preposterous—self-organised vigilante groups gone mad with power, in-game newspapers writing exposes and eventually being driven out of the game—Ludlow actually articulates one of the more serious problems evident in online communities: dysfunctional governance. At the beginning of the text, he draws clear and deliberate parallels between real-world governments and institutions and virtual Terms of Service and ad-hoc organisations:

> Given all of the things that are virtual or at least partially virtual, it is a short step to ask whether things like states can be virtual too. The answer is that of course they can. Not only can they be virtual, but they already are. You don’t want to confuse the United States government with buildings in Washington DC, or with military hardware, or with the politicians and leaders of the government. These are all important agents in the conduct of governmental activities, but the government itself is a virtual entity that is layered on top of the buildings and hardware and politicians. (Ludlow 2010: KL 36-40)

While we take these institutions for granted in the real world, all that structure is lost in the transition to the virtual. Much like how Gramsci identified the lack of history, custom, or tradition in the United States which allowed it to undergo rapid social reorganisation, online communities lack the structures and institutions necessary for functional social life. As such, these communities are rife with social problems that have no established processes or practices associated with them. Instead, social dysfunction and social life must be directly mediated: a greek god steps in. Not Zeus, but the corporation responsible for the creation and maintenance of that community.

Ludlow uses the term "greek god" very intentionally. Rather than being impartial or well-intentioned, "They reach in and help a friend or take action against an enemy, but for the most part they let their world idly settle into a state of corruption and chaos. When they do take action, they attempt to rewrite the software running the world to solve the problem. But of course most social problems cannot be engineered away" (Ludlow 2010: KL 64-66). While there are Terms of Service and End User License Agreements designed to mediate conflicts, they only apply in the real world; the online community is essentially lawless.

But how does this possibly relate to our current relationships to smartphones and information technologies? Don't we have laws of nature and government which restrict what corporations can and cannot do? Yes, of course, but that does not take this into account: that for the foreseeable future, more and more of our social lives will take place through computers and virtual spaces created by corporations. While redress through real-world institutions can eventually remedy social concerns or injustices, the virtual spaces we inhabit are becoming increasingly distant or abstract from the real world. For example: prior to September 19th, 2012, the default Maps application on Apple Inc. iOS devices was powered by Google Maps. However, due an inability to reach a business agreement between Apple and Google, Apple switched to its own maps system, and all hell broke loose. Apple's service was simply not comparable to Google's, and as a consequence of two companies ending a business agreement, untold thousands of users the world over suffered in ways both large and small.

To return to Ludlow's metaphor, two gods began fighting, and the mere mortals beneath them suffered terribly. While the real-world results in this case may have more or less negligible, this case does illustrate the potential hazards of commoditised and corporate-governed online life. If Apple or Google does not approve of the content of your application, they are free to remove it from their app store. Verizon Wireless can change the conditions of your service at nearly any given moment. Comcast is free to mete out access to competing content services while providing free and easy access to its own. The examples are many and myriad, but the relevant sociological point is this: as social life moves from the real world, governed by public law and common institutions, we are faced with an uneven and irregularly enforced social life. And, speaking to Crawford's earlier arguments, a dystopian future governed by a handful of highly-efficient corporations designed to generate and serve consumers' "needs" suddenly becomes remarkably plausible.

# Conclusions

It does not serve serious academic work to employ scare tactics; it is unlikely that the terrible futures predicted by science fiction writers will become reality any time soon. However, it is clear that the modern corporation is capable of interfering in the lives of its customers/consumers/users more than was ever possible before. With respect to the Marxist analyses conducted earlier in this chapter, it should be immediately apparent that these issues are deserving of immediate and rigorous critique and analysis. While fighting alienation in real world terms is more important than ever, it is essential to keep our eyes forward. The smartphone is a landmark innovation, on the order of the original desktop computers, but is more affordable, accessible, and powerful than any other information technology that has preceded it. Let it be a tool for empowerment, rather than the next realm of objectification, commodification, consumption, and alienation.


## Anil Dash: The Web We Lost