# Ludlow, Peter - *Our Future in Virtual Worlds*

Peter Ludlow's *Our Future in Virtual Worlds* is a short essay outlining his concerns with the current trajectory of development in online communities. While his confidence in the form and shape of the coming virtual worlds is misplaced (I am extremely skeptical that the web will have shifted entirely to 3D and interactive environments), his points are based in experience and are pertinent to the growing role of corporate ecosystems in smartphones. Arguing that companies have adopted a "greek god" model of governance and communities are capricious arbiters of justice, Ludlow calls for a new attitude toward transparent and consistent justice online.

Ludlow accustoms the reader to his perspective by exposing "real world" governments as virtual constructs; rather than being real, they are concepts that are generated from individuals, legislation, and policy. What, then, makes online communities any different? Their creators—rather than Enlightenment thinkers or politicians—are created by computer engineers of their own will or at the behest of companies. As a result, virtually all questions of governance have been left at the wayside in favor of externally-oriented and legally-defined Terms of Service and End User License Agreements.

Virtual worlds do not have functional justice systems. The "greek god" style of governance and justice is the haphazard and unfair system intervention by the creator when disputes arise. In the absence of such behavior, vigilantism takes its place. Individuals or groups will form to defend values or systems as they see fit, but often end up persecuting or bullying fellow citizens of virtual worlds. Both options are utterly opaque and arbitrary, and cause individuals to lose their investment in virtual worlds: be they capital, temporal, or emotional.

I reiterate that Ludlow's argument is unnecessarily reductionist and focused on an edge case. His thought regarding the "greek god" model of governance is essential to this work, however. If the smartphone is an extension of the brain and the self, what are we to make of the corporate ecosystems which determine what smartphones are capable of, and how they may operate? Any number of features of smartphones may be constraints on organic growth, because those features are determined by a corporation under market forces. For example: app stores' guidelines. Rather than allowing software apps to develop new capacities which expand the individual's ability, the blessing of the corporation is necessary to reach the smartphone user.

Rather than considering the ramifications upon the user's rights as expressed through the smartphone, I would argue corporations are fundamentally concerned with their profit and legality while remaining tight-lipped about their internal processes. This leads to uneven and inequitable development in smartphones, and locks the augmented self onto a trajectory pre-determined by financial interests.

# McLuhan, Marshall - *Understanding Media*

Marshall McLuhan's *Understanding Media* does not function well as an academic text. Rife with contradiction and muddled definitions, the writing tends toward aphorisms rather than statements. However, McLuhan lays out a crucial understanding of gadgets and technology as extensions of the body. Literal external organs, technology augments and expands the nervous system of the body. While this process has both been a boon to human capability, there has been an undeniable drag on the self. In the age of electronics and "electric technology", however, this process has prompted a state of auto-reflexivity in the user.

McLuhan deals with specific technological subjects in each chapter of this work, but Part I—specifically "The Gadget Lover: Narcissus as Narcosis"—speaks directly to the effects on the self. Narcissus was not in love with himself; he was in love with the lake that that so perfectly replicated himself—seamlessly bridging the gap between the self and the extension of the self. This is our relationship to gadgets and technology. 

As we append gadgets to our nervous system, McLuhan contends we invariably "auto-amputate". As a sense becomes awash in stimulus, we adjust ourselves to reduce sensation elsewhere (e.g. the "audiac", a device which overwhelms the individual with sound to act as an anesthetic). With the increasing richness and complexity of gadgets and media, we have auto-amputated more and more aggressively. With electronics there has been a shift. As electronics function near-instantaneously, we are suddenly capable of auto-reflexive use of technology: a "consciousness of the unconscious".

With this awareness, we are not necessarily shackled to technologies nor are we "the sex organs of the machine world". We become capable of self-aware and self-critical use of technologies, and that does a great deal to dispel nigh-mystic accusations of the hypnotic qualities of smartphones. While there is certainly danger there, McLuhan stated that technologies can vastly expand human experience without subverting it.

# Turkle, Sherry - *The Second Self*

In 1984, the world was introduced to the Apple Macintosh—the first affordable home computer to feature a keyboard, mouse, and Graphical User Interface (GUI). This computer would shape the trajectory of the entire Personal Computer industry, and provided the dominant User Experience (UX) paradigm for the next twenty years. However, what came before it was altogether more interesting.

Sherry Turkle's *The Second Self* written in the earliest days of the home computing movement. Examining the nascent programming, hacking, and homebrewing culture that was developing around the computer industry, Turkle developed an ethnography of both computers' users, and the social lives of computers themselves. Rather than delving deeply into the intricacies of each user's experience with computers, she focuses on ideal types to illustrate her understanding of the computer's role as an evocative object.

Rejecting the predominant understanding of computers as inert tools, Turkle embraced the zeitgeist of the homebrew movement by examining these devices as evocative objects—objects which prompt self-reflection. Turkle identifies the cornerstone of these evocative objects to be "marginality"; not alive, yet capable of thought (of a sort), computers inhabit one of the many grey areas in the world. "Computers brought philosophy down to earth. Even children playing with the first generation of computer toys and games were asking new questions about the machine's "life" and "mind" and then, by extension, wondering what was special about their own" (Intro.). 

Drawing clear parallels to the psychoanalysis movement in the early 20th century, Turkle establishes the computer as a manifestation of our culture's narcissism; however, this narcissism is not self-absorption but an insecurity in how we understand ourselves (Ch. 9). Much like psychoanalysis, we have assimilated the terms and metaphors of computation and programming to understand the human "mind as machine". 

While the decline of transparent programming culture has reduced the capacity of computers to be objects of direct expression through code-writing, the opaque GUI still affords tremendous opportunity for users to express themselves. The app economies of smartphones allow users to choose and shape their computing experiences, and result in ever-evolving intersections of human ability and processing power. While these devices and their abilities are taken for granted, there is still tremendous potential in studying the psychology of their use.