Meta/Outline.md, before:

# 1 - Introduction

## Acknowledgements [pg. i]

- Prof. Adams
- friends
- family
- technologists

## Foreword [pgs. i–?]

*A note on the personal nature of this study, and the experience of writing it.*

## Abstract

*Original abstract, submitted in the study proposal:*

The smartphone is a relatively sudden and recent phenomenon. Through the evolution of the Blackberry, and since the introduction the of the iPhone in 2007, consumer electronics have experienced a sea change. Where the personal computer was once a series of black or beige boxes atop the desk, eminently portable and powerful computers are now in the pockets of millions around the world. The very notion of a personal computer has been radically altered.

Smartphone sales have swiftly become a business worth billions of dollars, and there is little evidence to believe this is trend is a flash in the pan. The sudden proliferation of extremely powerful computers has profound ramifications for social life. The capacity of the individual to perform tasks is greater than ever before, and smartphones function as hubs for all social interaction. Whether direct and literal extensions of the self or a particularly insidious form of consumerism and alienation, this study intends to explore the role of the smartphone in contemporary society.

## Introduction [pg. 1–?]

*Introduces the study and details a brief history of information technology.*

- the smartphone is the herald of a new era, but it is not the only focus of this study. instead, it is a lens to examine the plethora of changes and social problems that have arisen out of it.

# 2/3 - Literature Review & Theory

## Literature Review/History of Major Technological Developments

*Possibly rendered redundant by the Introduction.*

## Theory 1

*Examines and discusses Marxist analysis with respect to contemporary consumer culture via the lens of the smartphone.

## Theory 2

# 4 - Methods

# 5 - Results

- themes
- - Computer education in early childhood
> > compare to Turkle's work in *The Second Self*
- - Study abroad/long distance communications
> > autoethnography of time spent abroad and technological anxiety in the United States; compare to McLuhan and the global village
- - Technology "addiction" and coping mechanisms; technology diets
> > cf. to Turkle in *Alone Together*
- - Commodification and corporatism in consumer technology; Google Glass
> > examine attitudes of participants as well as a Marxist analysis of means of consumption

# 6 - Conclusion

Commit message:

expanded chapter descriptions and specifics of qualitative methodology

Meta/Outline.md, after:

# 1 - Introduction

## Acknowledgements [pg. i]

- Prof. Adams
- friends
- family
- technologists

## Foreword [pgs. i–?]

*A note on the personal nature of this study, and the experience of writing it.*

## Abstract

*Original abstract, submitted in the study proposal:*

The smartphone is a relatively sudden and recent phenomenon. Through the evolution of the Blackberry, and since the introduction the of the iPhone in 2007, consumer electronics have experienced a sea change. Where the personal computer was once a series of black or beige boxes atop the desk, eminently portable and powerful computers are now in the pockets of millions around the world. The very notion of a personal computer has been radically altered.

Smartphone sales have swiftly become a business worth billions of dollars, and there is little evidence to believe this is trend is a flash in the pan. The sudden proliferation of extremely powerful computers has profound ramifications for social life. The capacity of the individual to perform tasks is greater than ever before, and smartphones function as hubs for all social interaction. Whether direct and literal extensions of the self or a particularly insidious form of consumerism and alienation, this study intends to explore the role of the smartphone in contemporary society.

## Introduction [pg. 1–?]

*Introduces the study and details a brief history of information technology.*

- the smartphone is the herald of a new era, but it is not the only focus of this study. instead, it is a lens to examine the plethora of changes and social problems that have arisen out of it.

# 2/3 - Literature Review & Theory

## Literature Review/History of Major Technological Developments

*Possibly rendered redundant by the Introduction.*

## Theory 1

*Examines and discusses Marxist analysis with respect to contemporary consumer culture via the lens of the smartphone.*

## Theory 2

*Provides an alternative account of technological development and interaction in human social life; also introduces cyborg theory and actor network theory as alternative systems of establishing meaning.*

# 4 - Methods

*Outlines the rationale behind the methods used to collect and analyse data.*

## Introduction

## Qualitative Over Quantitative

## Methodologies

### Autoethnography

### Qualitative Interviews

- participant solicitation
- - public postings
- - contact price
- interview format
- - instrument design
- - interview context (e.g. location)
- - recording medium
- - consent form/follow-up survey
- analysis
- - transcription
- - analysis w/ respect to Turkle's research

# 5 - Results

- themes
- - Computer education in early childhood
> > compare to Turkle's work in *The Second Self*
- - Study abroad/long distance communications
> > autoethnography of time spent abroad and technological anxiety in the United States; compare to McLuhan and the global village
- - Technology "addiction" and coping mechanisms; technology diets
> > cf. to Turkle in *Alone Together*
- - Commodification and corporatism in consumer technology; Google Glass
> > examine attitudes of participants as well as a Marxist analysis of means of consumption

# 6 - Conclusion
