# Acknowledgements

Notables: Paul Miller, Stephen Hackett, Amber Case, William Gibson

# Abstract

This study examines theories used to explain human-object relationships with respect to the contemporary smartphone. From Marx to today, attitudes toward the rapidly evolving technologies we surround ourselves with have not concerned themselves with the microsociological or individual effects. Through the examination of individuals' coping mechanisms for the profoundly interconnected and computerised lives we lead today, this study recommends a new approach and theorisation of smartphones and other technologies toward a more progressive and adaptable framework.

# A Conversation with Siri

[Something of a prologue to the Introduction; helps set tone (academic but not stuffy) and establish themes to be revisited later in the paper (machine intelligence and social interaction).]

**Siri:** What can I help you with?

**Me:** What's the weather look like tomorrow?

**Siri:** Some bad weather coming up through Wednesday… down to 12° and snowing: 

[informational card, consisting of: 

Current temperature: 16°, H: 25°, L: 16° 

Week's forecast: snowy and cold.]

**Me:** Thank you Siri.

**Siri:** You don't need to thank me.

**Me:** Why don't I?

**Siri:** Here's what I found: 

[another informational card, consisting of: 

Input interpretation: Why Don't I (music work) 

album: Sonny Rollins, Volume 2 

music act: Sonny Rollins 

release date: 1957]

# Introduction
*Establishes the main themes and ideas of the study, as well as the primary theories and methods.*

# A History of Technology, Computing, and the Smartphone
*Familiarises the reader with the relative leaps made in computers and technological progress in the past century, and the history behind the smartphone today.*

## Brief history of computing
[needs substantial reworking and sources; however, as it is a non-critical overview, it should be simple to expand and revise. Also, footnotes were included in the original draft and did not port over properly.]

The best place to start is the beginning. While this research concerns itself with the smartphone in contemporary life, it is essential to understand how the personal computer—the PC—came about, and how programmers and users reacted to these new tools. During the war, an enormous amount of capital was invested by the U.S. military in developing new technologies. California's San Fernando valley soon became a hotbed of aerospace and radio research, but it was the wave of innovation that came after which would give it the moniker it goes by today: Silicon Valley. 

After hostilities had ceased, engineers found themselves well-off and in a large community of like-minded innovators. It was in this intellectually fertile environment that the semiconductor, the integrated circuit, and the microprocessor were invented amidst a wave of experimentation and exploration. These technologies, born from stories of genius and betrayal worthy of Greek tragedy, allowed companies like Hewlett-Packard, Apple, Atari, and Intel to start defining what the desktop PC would look like. Research conducted in nearby labs and universities stoked the fires of invention even further, and the computer market—once dominated by huge enterprises and institutions—found itself racing to the bottom. It was the 1970's, and the fight for everyday computing had begun.

## The Programmable Computer
The potential of the PC was already well-established. Throughout the 1960's, research labs and start-ups had developed prototypes and even brought some to market. However, price was a huge barrier and it wasn't until the home-brew movement that PC's were proven to be a viable product. Famously, Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak sold the first Apple PC's as wood-enclosed computers made in Jobs' father's garage. However, these extremely crude operations soon became fully-fledged businesses and manufacturers. While still expensive, computers had become exponentially more affordable and well within the reach of the upper middle class and schools.

# Theory One
*Examines the theories of Marx, Gramsci, and Baudrillard and how they apply to the experience of the consumer in terms of alienation through technology. Ludlow's Greek God model of governance an interesting analogy.*

## Marx

When considering smartphones—and particularly the iPhone—many leap to Marx, exclaiming, "what an example of commodity fetishism!". While correct in that these products are highly fetishised commodities, this response is reductive. Marx's work was essential to the critical discourse that came after it, but fails to grasp contemporary realities of production and consumption in fundamental fashions. Furthermore, Marx's preemption of his own, predicted revolution left him without knowledge of the specific manifestations of alienation in a post-Taylor, post-Ford society.

## Gramsci: Prison Notebook 22

*Establishes the theory of Fordism and thoroughly critiques the growing American culture of corporate paternalism—a trend that has taken on new life in the digital domain.*

Despite being held as a political prisoner by the Italian Fascist party, Antonio Gramsci was able to analyse and elaborate the enormous changes occurring on the other side of the Atlantic. While Marx had outlined the specific modes of alienation and exploitation, Gramsci provided a thoroughly articulate and prescient account of American industry's effects on the worker/consumer. After World War I, it was clear social and economic conditions were rapidly changing in Europe. 

Aristocratic classes—kindly termed "parasites" by Gramsci and his contemporaries—were in a precarious position. The industrial revolution had been kind to the United States, and Europe wished to "have a full barrel and a drunken wife" inasmuch that it wished to match American productive capacity while maintaining its traditional aristocracy and attendant social classes (564). While arguments of the time defended the existing class and social structures, Gramsci made quick work of them; cities across Europe had become rife with marginally productive citizens as consequence of law, custom, or tradition. In contrast, America did not have "this leaden burden to support" (570). In effect, American industry developed in a relative vacuum, free to evolve and experiment with new structures and relationships between firms and workers.

Rationalism was the new order of the day, and was seized upon by men like Frederick Taylor and Henry Ford. Practices like vertical integration (the stratification and alignment of means of production along one firm's holdings and interests) made leaps and bounds in productivity and efficiency. Unions and skilled labour were subverted by the attractive wages and benefits that were offered by those improvements. Gramsci realised that the factory had become the epicentre of a new hegemony, where "the whole life of the nation revolve[d] around production" (571).

As factory activity became the centre of productive life after World War I, *present complaints of "work-life imbalance" are rendered pathetic.* Rather than simple attempts at "puritanism", Gramsci made it clear that firms' invasion of workers' private lives was the manifestation of something else entirely: "the biggest collective effort to date to create, with unprecedented speed, and with a consciousness of purpose unmatched in history, a new type of worker and of man" (597). He continues:

> "It is from this point of view that one should study the "puritanical" initiative of American industrialists like Ford. It is certain that they are not concerned with the "humanity" or the "spirituality of the worker, which are immediately smashed. This "humanity and spirituality" cannot be realised except in the world of production and work and in productive "creation". They exist most in the artisan, in the "demiurge", when the worker's personality was reflected whole in the object created and when the link between art and labour was still very strong. But it is precisely against this "humanism" that the new industrialism is fighting. "Puritanical" initiatives simply have the purpose of preserving, outside of work, a certain psycho-physical equilibrium which prevents the physiological collapse of the worker, exhausted by the new method of production."

**Important theme: (corporative) systems, as they take on history, transition to preservation rather than propulsion (583). In the case of industry and technology, monopolisation and consolidation has become the norm. That said, change is still possible (even the most tightly swathed baby managed to develop and grow) (584).**

## Aglietta

### A Theory of Capitalist Regulation

*Further explores corporate paternalism and offers a comprehensive account of its evolution in the American industrial context.*

## Baudrillard

### The Consumer Society

*An extension of Aglietta and Gramsci in critiquing the ways in which corporations drive and influence consumer life; that in fact, consumption has become the engine of society, and that society has completely internalised the consumptive prerogative that it is completely different from Marx's conceptions of production.*

## Ludlow: The Greek God Model of Governance

*Ludlow takes these themes into the present with his model of greek gods (corporations) and mortals (users). Launching-off point for examining alienation, oppression, and social life through computers and smartphones.*

Peter Ludlow's *Our Future in Virtual Worlds* is a short essay outlining his concerns with the current trajectory of development in online communities. While his confidence in the form and shape of the coming virtual worlds is misplaced (I am extremely skeptical that the web will have shifted entirely to 3D and interactive environments), his points are based in experience and are pertinent to the growing role of corporate ecosystems in smartphones. Arguing that companies have adopted a "greek god" model of governance and communities are capricious arbiters of justice, Ludlow calls for a new attitude toward transparent and consistent justice online.

Ludlow accustoms the reader to his perspective by exposing "real world" governments as virtual constructs; rather than being real, they are concepts that are generated from individuals, legislation, and policy. What, then, makes online communities any different? Their creators—rather than Enlightenment thinkers or politicians—are created by computer engineers of their own will or at the behest of companies. As a result, virtually all questions of governance have been left at the wayside in favour of externally-oriented and legally-defined Terms of Service and End User License Agreements.

Virtual worlds do not have functional justice systems. The "greek god" style of governance and justice is the haphazard and unfair system intervention by the creator when disputes arise. In the absence of such behaviour, vigilantism takes its place. Individuals or groups will form to defend values or systems as they see fit, but often end up persecuting or bullying fellow citizens of virtual worlds. Both options are utterly opaque and arbitrary, and cause individuals to lose their investment in virtual worlds: be they capital, temporal, or emotional.

I reiterate that Ludlow's argument is unnecessarily reductionist and focused on an edge case. His thought regarding the "greek god" model of governance is essential to this work, however. If the smartphone is an extension of the brain and the self, what are we to make of the corporate ecosystems which determine what smartphones are capable of, and how they may operate? Any number of features of smartphones may be constraints on organic growth, because those features are determined by a corporation under market forces. For example: app stores' guidelines. Rather than allowing software apps to develop new capacities which expand the individual's ability, the blessing of the corporation is necessary to reach the smartphone user.

Rather than considering the ramifications upon the user's rights as expressed through the smartphone, I would argue corporations are fundamentally concerned with their profit and legality while remaining tight-lipped about their internal processes. This leads to uneven and inequitable development in smartphones, and locks the augmented self onto a trajectory pre-determined by financial interests.

# Theory Two
*Establishes cyborg theory as a descendant of Marxist analysis, while making significant strides away from classically determinist positions. Uses Kelly as an example of a hybrid-based theory to reorient our attitudes toward technology.*

## Introduction

Donna Haraway's "A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century" was a seminal work in feminist theory which challenged many of feminism's most sacrosanct principles. However, for the purposes of this research, it is also important to note it was a profound assault on social theories which depended on essentialism and unilateralism. More specifically, it challenged the gradual shift that had begun to take place in the computing community; instead of being seen as tools constituted of discrete parts, computers began their transformation into singular and autonomous entities of nigh-magical ability. In this chapter, I would contend that the development of the graphical user interface (GUI) and other, "natural" interfaces have transformed our relationship to computers in a fundamental fashion. Where computers were once tools—extensions of the self, to paraphrase Marshall McLuhan—smartphones and other devices are popularly conceived as angry and buzzing hellions dedicated to totalising our collective time and attention. Essentialism and the oppressive deference of contemporary smartphones have resulted in a state of moral panic.

## McLuhan

Marshall McLuhan's *Understanding Media* does not function well as an academic text. Rife with contradiction and muddled definitions, the writing tends toward aphorisms rather than statements. However, McLuhan lays out a crucial understanding of gadgets and technology as extensions of the body. Literal external organs, technology augments and expands the nervous system of the body. While this process has both been a boon to human capability, there has been an undeniable drag on the self. In the age of electronics and "electric technology", however, this process has prompted a state of auto-reflexivity in the user.

McLuhan deals with specific technological subjects in each chapter of this work, but Part I—specifically "The Gadget Lover: Narcissus as Narcosis"—speaks directly to the effects on the self. Narcissus was not in love with himself; he was in love with the lake that that so perfectly replicated himself—seamlessly bridging the gap between the self and the extension of the self. This is our relationship to gadgets and technology. 

As we append gadgets to our nervous system, McLuhan contends we invariably "auto-amputate". As a sense becomes awash in stimulus, we adjust ourselves to reduce sensation elsewhere (e.g. the "audiac", a device which overwhelms the individual with sound to act as an anaesthetic). With the increasing richness and complexity of gadgets and media, we have auto-amputated more and more aggressively. With electronics there has been a shift. As electronics function near-instantaneously, we are suddenly capable of auto-reflexive use of technology: a "consciousness of the unconscious".

With this awareness, we are not necessarily shackled to technologies nor are we "the sex organs of the machine world". We become capable of self-aware and self-critical use of technologies, and that does a great deal to dispel nigh-mystic accusations of the hypnotic qualities of smartphones. While there is certainly danger there, McLuhan stated that technologies can vastly expand human experience without subverting it.

## Haraway

Mass Effect 2, the second instalment of titular video game series, follows Commander Shepherd, a generic space marine whom the player is meant to interact through and imprint upon.  Killed and left as a frozen husk, Shepherd is miraculously revived through the application of state of the art cybernetic and electronic components.  In his revival, Commander Shepherd of Mass Effect is–by all outward appearances–human, and is treated as such by his companions within the game itself as well as the player and the general audience. The writers and artists behind the character of Shepherd, and countless other cyborg characters in popular fiction, play with the possibility that his “humanity” has been lost. However, the virtually inevitable redemption these characters–the restoration of their ineffable “human-ness”, be it good or evil–betrays a larger bias held in contemporary Western society. Although some have argued this reductive perspective is the result of poor writing, that latent desire to recognise an essential humanity in cyborgs such as Shepherd seems rampant. 

It was through the cyborg–an individual with abilities amplified through incorporation of the foreign “other”–that Donna Haraway, in her seminal work "A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century", attacked feminist theory of the time as well as the larger notions of dualism and patriarchy which critical discourse had settled upon. Blending both metaphor and literal meaning, she explains, "We are all chimeras, theorised and fabricated hybrids of machine and organism; in short, we are cyborgs," (Haraway 1990:150). With no clear origin and filled with internal tensions, the cyborg is utterly contextual and varied: there is no universal language or pretext.

To facilitate her analysis and proposed political recourse, she states three claims: that the boundary between human and animal has been irrevocably breached; that the boundary between "human-animal (organism) and machine has been breached in the same way; and that the lines between the physical and non-physical are "imprecise" (Haraway 1990:151-3). The explosion of biotechnology in the twentieth century as well as understanding of evolutionary processes reduced humans to the status of just another species, albeit a very capable one. Similarly, the explosion of "pop physics" and the spread of the transistor led Haraway to state, "modern machinery is an irreverent upstart god, mocking the Father's ubiquity and spirituality" (Haraway 1990:153). Virtually invisible, "our best machines are made of sunshine; they are all light and clean because they are nothing but signals, electromagnetic waves, a section of a spectrum, and these machines are eminently portable, mobile," (Haraway 1990:153). The barriers that had been used to arrange identities, systems, and societies have been torn down by bio- and techno-science. Though Haraway primarily sought to generate a feminist political response to the dualistic "informatics of domination" through the cyborg, her claims laid the ground for radically different conceptions of how we relate to the world of things around us. 

After the hierarchical and patriarchal systems of old came these informatics of domination: dichotomies between the “natural” and the “artificial”. Haraway suggests that moving beyond hierarchical and patriarchal systems is not enough; we must rebel against these “scary new networks” which perpetuate the irrational arrangements of old (Haraway 1990:161-2). That we surround ourselves with gadgets and devices that subtly reshape our lives; that we tamper freely with code of life, DNA; examples are abundant that these distinctions are dying, if not already dead. Instead, by becoming a cyborg in identity, ideology, politics–an endless series of ironies–it becomes possible for one to break free from the calcified tracks of thought left by a dead or dying patriarchy. Through her use of the cyborg both a heuristic device and ideal, both literally and metaphorically, Haraway forced a frameshift in critical and social theory.

The ramifications of this manifesto were vast; even if they were not felt immediately. Lewis, in her 2003 essay "Prozac and the Post-human Politics of Cyborgs", demonstrates an application of the new “cyborgology”. Drawing from Haraway's work, Lewis demonstrates the subtly shifting realities we inhabit and our movement away from dualistic discourses of good/bad, natural/unnatural: 
> "The usual grand narratives for legitimising or delegitimising Prozac are narratives of the True or narratives of the Good. But, with the many Prozac significations available, there is no one grand Truth of Prozac. There are instead many situated truths about Prozac. Similarly, there is no single judgment of the Good with regard to Prozac. In some discourses, Prozac is a dawn of light for millions of depression sufferers, in others it is one of world’s newest and most insidious of evils." (2003:55)

By Lewis’ analysis, these “truths” and notions of “good” or “evil” are utterly false in a cyborgian discourse; they are remainders of an old system of being, leveraged anew to oppress and subjugate. The drug itself, with its “transformative” nature by definition makes its consumer a literal cyborg. Furthermore, it has deeply perturbed notions of wellness, prompting unsettlement and confusion. The doctor says to the patient, “Well, do you want me to write you prescription for Prozac?” “I’m not depressed.” “How do you know?” Meanwhile, within the psychiatric establishment there is a multiplicity of forces–pharmaceutical conglomerates, administrators, clinical psychiatrists–acting in their own interests, casually adjusting their language and identity to reach their aims. The anarchic and fluid states around Prozac are cyborgian by nature, and only by abandoning the sacrosanct can the entirety of the system be grasped and changed. Lewis found, "The effects of Prozac, the drug, like other kinds of technoscience, is not clearly oppressive or liberatory. It is both. Sometimes one more than another, but always both. This makes the problem, not Prozac itself, but the politics of knowledge surrounding the discourse of Prozac," (Lewis 2003:62). 

These complex, cyborgian bodies of meaning have been found to be rampant in professional athleticism as well. Butryn published twice on the construction of narratives around athletes, from the perspectives of the public and athletes themselves. Specifically focusing on the narratives and interpretations constructed around elite athletes, Butryn concludes “our ‘humanness’ has been profoundly altered by more intimate, available, and seemingly unavoidable engagements with technology” (Butryn 2003:17). However, the elite athletes whom Butryn interviewed were extremely conservative about their relatively cyborgian qualities:
> “There [was] little evidence that athletes in this study felt that common supplements, rehabilitative technologies, and the various sorts of equipment and implement technologies significantly compromised the perceived authenticity of their performances. The key issue. again, relates to the idea that the sporting body, as much as the sport itself, must remain pure” (Butryn 2003: 27). 

Although there was an acknowledgement of increasing cyborgification amongst the athletes, they still seemed to cling to a sense of a deeply rooted “purity” or “humanity”. 

Similarly, in examining Lance Armstrong’s semi-autobiography It’s All About the Bike, Butryn and Masucci found a profound desire to associate with the natural or pure. A literal “cyborg ‘hero’”, Armstrong is still seen as a triumph of humanity and willpower, subject to the challenges–such as a lower middle-class background–as any other human (Butryn and Masucci 2003: 125, 140). But when viewed through the cyborgian lens, Armstrong is the postmodern ideal of compound identity: saved from cancer by state-of-the-art medicine he became a champion of cycling–a sport infamous for its highly-technical kit and obsessive self-enhancement through chemical means. As Lewis stated, the technology of antidepressants and other neurochemicals is not inherently bad, but it can be directed toward ends–in essence, cyborg technologies are embraced when they do not threaten the so-called purity of the individual. 

It is plain that the distinctions and definitions of acceptable and unacceptable technologies and their uses are very problematic. In a cyborg politics, systems of meaning coalesce and dissipate along with their contexts, and are interpreted and expressed individually through hybridised lenses. However, Lewis provides some measure of direction; using the case of Prozac as a case of the new cyborgian reality, she calls for "priority of democracy over science"–the conscious, self-aware development of knowledge through science. In doing so, she invokes the key differentiator of human choice and agency–”humanness” and humanity–as a means of clarifying these concerns (Lewis 2003:62). However, by identifying human choice as the defining feature of positive development, she perversely shuts the door to more complex or bizarre interpretations of cyborgism.

## Turkle

**In transitions between types of civilisation, Gramsci argues the middle class undergo coercion. Puritan ideologies (human essentialism, in this case) arise until the society has successfully transitioned (*Selections* 592. "Totalitarian social hypocrisy" (594)***

### The Second Self

In 1984, the world was introduced to the Apple Macintosh—the first affordable home computer to feature a keyboard, mouse, and Graphical User Interface (GUI). This computer would shape the trajectory of the entire Personal Computer industry, and provided the dominant User Experience (UX) paradigm for the next twenty years. However, what came before it was altogether more interesting.

Sherry Turkle's *The Second Self* written in the earliest days of the home computing movement. Examining the nascent programming, hacking, and home-brewing culture that was developing around the computer industry, Turkle developed an ethnography of both computers' users, and the social lives of computers themselves. Rather than delving deeply into the intricacies of each user's experience with computers, she focuses on ideal types to illustrate her understanding of the computer's role as an evocative object.

Rejecting the predominant understanding of computers as inert tools, Turkle embraced the zeitgeist of the home-brew movement by examining these devices as evocative objects—objects which prompt self-reflection. Turkle identifies the cornerstone of these evocative objects to be "marginality"; not alive, yet capable of thought (of a sort), computers inhabit one of the many grey areas in the world. "Computers brought philosophy down to earth. Even children playing with the first generation of computer toys and games were asking new questions about the machine's "life" and "mind" and then, by extension, wondering what was special about their own" (Intro.). 

Drawing clear parallels to the psychoanalysis movement in the early 20th century, Turkle establishes the computer as a manifestation of our culture's narcissism; however, this narcissism is not self-absorption but an insecurity in how we understand ourselves (Ch. 9). Much like psychoanalysis, we have assimilated the terms and metaphors of computation and programming to understand the human "mind as machine". 

While the decline of transparent programming culture has reduced the capacity of computers to be objects of direct expression through code-writing, the opaque GUI still affords tremendous opportunity for users to express themselves. The app economies of smartphones allow users to choose and shape their computing experiences, and result in ever-evolving intersections of human ability and processing power. While these devices and their abilities are taken for granted, there is still tremendous potential in studying the psychology of their use.

### Alone Together

## Kevin Kelly: The seventh kingdom

Human choice–typically but not exclusively collective–has an important role in the development of technology. Oftentimes, individuals cannot control the oftentimes meteoric trajectory of technological progress through their choices alone: the social sciences have been aware of how social life influences technological development, and have established the field of "science studies" consisting of "detailed ethnographies of the microsocial forces involved in the creation of supposedly neutral, or objective, science," (Lewis 2003:52-3). However, this is an incomplete explanation of how  progress occurs, writes Kevin Kelly. A founding editor of Wired magazine, Kelly takes Haraway’s work to heart in What Technology Wants and establishes a dramatically different conception of how technologies spread and develop. By embracing the cyborgian outlook to perhaps outlandish lengths, Kelly syncretises existing scientific knowledge with a radical re-imagining of technology and our evolution.

Kelly begins with the very etymology of the word "technology". "Technelogos", a joining of the words "logos" [a principle of knowledge] and "techne" [art, skill, craft, or ingenuity; an ability to outwit circumstances] existed only in a blink of history: four times in one essay by Aristotle, without any concrete definition (Kelly 2010:KL 132-141). However, Kelly appropriates the term, and applies it in his study of the hominid's unique affinity for overcoming obstacles. Merging the German technik [the totality of machines] and the French technique [the society and culture of tools] into one word: the technium. "The technium extends beyond shiny hardware to include culture, art, social institutions, and intellectual creations of all types. It includes intangibles like software, law, and philosophical concepts. And most important, it includes the generative impulses of our inventions to encourage more tool making, more technology invention, and more self-enhancing connections," (Kelly 2010:KL 223-226). Haraway’s third claim–the slipperiness between physical and non-physical entities–is key, as it realises “intellectual creations” as part of the technium, making it more than the simple sum of our physical tools.

Having established the constituents of the technium, Kelly then leverages Haraway’s second claim. The stunning similarities between the evolution of biological life and the the development of the technium are no mistake. In tandem, biology and the technium have moved from chaos to states of ever-increasing complexity, a process of information ordering itself that Kelly calls *exotropy*. Rather than using the term negentropy–“the absence of the absence of order”–exotropy rejects "entropy in reverse" in favour of a coherent accumulation. In biology, evolution took place by a triad of factors: the adaptive vector, constituting the functional changes in organisms; the contingency vector, which is the history of organisms "getting lucky", even if they are not superior; and the inevitable vector, which accounts for the accumulation of structural factors which accumulate over time. 	The technium has developed almost identically. 

Almost, because rather than evolving unconsciously toward functional forms, humans have exerted their will on the technium. Instead of the adaptive vector, there is the intentional vector: the element of human choice (Kelly 2010:KL 2667-71). As Lewis concluded, individuals rarely shape the technium themselves, but societies have substantial direction over it. Kelly cites satellite photography of North Korea; while the rest of Asia is lit up with electric light, the lone dot of Pyongyang is illuminated. Their expression of electric light is a result of their collective social life.

What is clear, however, is that individual choices do not control or regulate every aspect of technology. While humans can tilt the direction of technology toward one direction or another, the so-called "momentum of technological progress" seems to carry it down its own path. Moore’s Law, which predicted the approximate doubling of computing power every two years is an example of the juggernaut-like evolution of the technium. The consistent co-invention of technologies–varying types of light bulb had been "invented" at least twenty-three times in the span of several years before Edison–suggests a sort of inevitability to progress (Kelly 2010:KL 2044-50). Kelly analogises this to our own biology: "Human adolescence is inevitable, but delinquency is not," (Kelly 2010:KL 2635-2636). For the technium, electricity was preordained by history and environment, but the specifics of whether the current was AC/DC what the voltage was going to be were entirely unknown. 

Just as a seed wants water and soil to grow, the technium wants. Society is accustomed to fauna and flora having desires for food or water. But, we are not accustomed to the technium doing so.  Kelly again analogises this to human biology: "there comes a moment in the childhood of our biological offspring when their childish selfish nature confronts us, and we have to acknowledge that they have their own agenda. Even though their very own life is an unambiguous continuation of our life (all their cells derive uninterrupted from our cells), our children have their own life. No matter how many babies we have seen, we are unsettled each time these moments of independence arrive," (Kelly 2010:KL 2726-2729). The technium is different though; unlike biology, humans are utterly bound up in the technium. Quoting psychologist Sherry Turkle, "technology is our 'second self.' It is both 'other' and 'us.' Unlike our biological children, who grow up to have minds completely separate from us, the technium’s autonomy includes us and our collective minds," (Kelly 2010:KL 2732-2734).

## Simmel

[I'm waffling back and forth on Simmel's place in the study. I've included my writing on him from my contemporary theory paper here, but I feel that it's more of a distraction from my argument rather than an asset. Thoughts?]

Kelly’s claims–fantastic and strange as they are–express an cyborgian attitude and analysis which exists only in minority. Butryn’s research showed the societal tendency toward a sort of human-chauvinism is prevalent even in those for whom cyborgism is lived daily. But despite there being an apparently commonly agreed-upon distinction between human and machine, modern culture is an overwhelmingly predisposed toward socialising or anthropomorphising technologies we use regularly. As people own cars, they decorate and name them; when a new computer is being set up, it asks for a name. Tom Scocca passionately excoriates Microsoft Word–a clump of computer code sold at retail–for having changed and betrayed him: 
> “I came of age with Word. It’s the program I used to write my college papers, overcoming old-fashioned page counts with its magical font-switching technology: Times, tightly justified, if the writing was running too long; airily monospaced Courier if things were too short. In those days, Word was an obedient and resourceful servant. Today, it's become an overbearing boss, one who specialises in make-work.” (2012)

As Kelly stated, the technium has wants and needs, and humans react accordingly every day–social lives are lived with the technologies that surround us. Regardless, the vast majority of society lives in denial of this fact, maintaining a specious distinction between an essential, human self and the other. 

Arjun Appadurai, explaining the social lives of objects in “Commodities and the politics of value”, acknowledges the social lives of things. Citing Simmel’s Philosophy of Money, Appadurai sees value as a function of exchange (Appadurai 1986:76-7). While this perspective does recognise social interactions with objects, it attributes all social value to human action–in this case, exchange. Ultimately, objects and commodities are subject to “socially regulated paths and competitively inspired diversions” (Appadurai 1986:85). Decades later, Komter takes Appadurai’s categories of gifts and commodities and he subdivides them: communal sharing, asymmetric authority ranking, equality matching and market pricing while establishing a fuller role for the object in collective social life (Komter 2001:66-7,72). Speaking directly to Appadurai’s influence, Komter reiterates the status of an object as a “tournament of value”, but he does make the following distinction: “...relationships not only get meaning by means of the trajectory of things, but, inversely, that things derive their meaning from their place and role within relationships. Things are markers as well as marks of relationship” (2001:73-4). This dynamic understanding of objects and individuals comes closer to Kelly’s vision of a technium being enabled and directed by humans, blending and blurring the figurative lines between metal and flesh–mutualistic, rather than antagonistic or possessive (2010:KL 4604-12).

Strangely, the work of Georg Simmel could also serve as a new model of social interaction. Appadurai’s application of Simmel’s insight–that value is not inherent, and that it is ascribed socially–is a sound observation, particularly in a discourse and society profoundly shaped by capitalism and Marxist theory (1986:85). In light of cyborgism, however, what constitutes an object rather than a human? Instead, Simmel’s theories of the individual, dyad, and triad might serve a cyborgian analysis more appropriately. Given that the individual and the notion of freedom are both products of social life, the modern smartphone is an appropriate example (Simmel 1950:118-22). In a world where almost everything is digitised, computerised, measured and sensed by a self-networking technium, the smartphone is something of a virtual representative of the whole. As an extraordinarily powerful computer designed expressly to interface with its user in the most pleasant manner possible, the smartphone allows a user to manipulate and interact with the near-infinite sea of abstract or intangible information surrounding them–for the moment, the human individual can virtually interface with the almost the entirety of the technological organism. 

Without suggesting independence, agency, or thought on the part of the technium, Simmel’s dyad and triad appropriately describe the status of contemporary social life for millions of people. Heads buried in their phones, people carry with them constant companions and fair friends who carry a wealth of interaction and information. In this sense, the dyad is formed: secrets are tucked safely away within the technium, while triviality and intimacy seem only a mental leap away (Simmel 1950:123-8). While the constancy and consistency of the relationship between a smartphone and its user does not necessarily mesh with Simmel’s definition, is the informatic thrall in which people find themselves all that dissimilar to that of a close friend in private? Triadic relations are abundant as well; Facebook, as an online social network, is the colossal result of exotropic processes both material and informational as servers running algorithms guide friends and associates to each other across the great blue and white void. Marche’s examination of Facebook explains this process perfectly, as individuals who might have been predisposed toward certain disorders or dysfunctions see their social lives sanctioned and moderated by Facebook. Even in the title, “Is Facebook Making Us Lonely?”, the “super-personal unit” Simmel describes in marriage and other relationships is implied directly (1950:129-30). Although these specific examples do not necessarily fit or function ideally, they are in keeping with the hybridised, unconventional, and perhaps ironic ideals of Haraway’s manifesto. The literal and figurative alignments of social relationships both with and against these theories are self-explanatory–in Haraway’s terms. 

# Methods

# Results

# Conclusion
[Draft conclusion pulled from contemporary social theory research paper:]

It is immediately apparent that the sociological tools we currently possess are not adequate for addressing the mounting tensions in and around the use of technology and its gradual remoulding of our social lives. We are inundated with cultural allusions to the growing discomfort we experience in our identities and lives today; optimistic or pessimistic, the itch is there and only grows stronger. Robertson, in describing the ongoing gendering of robots in Japan, concludes, “but what has yet to be broached among roboticists and policy-makers is a serious and sweeping discussion about the existential, ethical, humane, social and interpersonal limits of the safety, comfort and convenience associated with the ‘robotic lifestyle’” (Robertson 2010:29). Much like Haraway, this statement is intended toward the politics of sex and gender in robotics. And much like the “Cyborg Manifesto”, it more than adequately summarises the status of social life in an astoundingly complex and technologised world.

As everyday human activity is reshaped–bit by bit, by the technium or each technology–social life changes along with it. Truly divergent, radical, and even outlandish thinking and writing is necessary to sort out meaning and understanding in this social environment. Affect, as presented by Patricia Clough and others, is one such possibility. By understanding affect-itself as something unmoored from embodied experience or effort; ”a disembodied matter... generalised matter beyond the labourer’s body... which disregards the bounded-ness of the human body, thus troubling the conceptualisation of the body as the body-as-organism”, then the sort of cyborg identity which Haraway demanded might be more easily attainable than in the current discourse of neoliberalism (Clough et al. 2007:65). Affective theory of affect-itself is relational and fluid, allowing for the intellectual and rhetorical flexibility necessary to move forward with self-awareness and caution (2007:73). While this work is very much still in development, it shows promise for providing the tools to reckon with a world which will only grow stranger.


