# Prologue

I've always been a big fan of podcasts—they're like public radio for the Internet. And, like many who listen to public radio, I listen to be exposed to new information; to laugh, to wonder, to converse, and to think. Now, one of those podcasts had made its way onto the topic of whether writers should write for free. A relatively well-known and accomplished writer had been solicited by a young editor at *The Atlantic* to repurpose one of his pieces for no payment. Of course, this prompted a firestorm in the journalism community which spread into the other, "creative" professions (e.g. web design, photography). While the specifics of this case were endlessly debated, there was something of a consensus: work deserves fair pay. 

A fine resolution, no? Unfortunately, there's a wrinkle. That debate took place on all corners of the Internet, but one corner lit up in particular: Branch. Branch is a free service which functions as a online forum for discussion. It's beautifully designed and only requires a Twitter account to participate. However, in a moment on this podcast, the hosts realised: they all had written well-researched and careful responses on this website, **for free**. In that moment, I too had a realisation. In writing this study, I had done the exact same thing. I had gone to this service, wilfully given my credentials, and proceeded to host a discussion on the relative merits of Google Glass (a product which this study will return to).

As we sociologists are wont to do, I began to wonder. Why was my first response to host a discussion on the website of a company I hardly knew anything about? Why did I feel compelled to take the subject of my academic research and hastily throw it into the aether, for free? How did the product of my intellectual labour become something I was more than happy to give away for free? How did we ever get here?

# Literature Review

## The Web Is Dead. Long Live the Internet

"The Web is Dead. Long Live the Internet", cried *Wired* Magazine in September of 2010. Of course, a firestorm erupted in the wake of this announcement; how could the Web be dead, when more people than ever were active regular participants in online communities? When smartphones were taking over the world, and computers were faster, cheaper, and more interconnected than ever before? *Wired*, the herald of the modern technocracy since its founding in 1993, was recognising that the online world had changed. Rather than using web browsers to move from page to page across the internet, most people's exposure to the internet came through services and purpose-built applications: "Facebook, Twitter, and *The New York Times*" (Anderson and Wolff 2010). The World Wide Web—the flat, chaotic landscape where every user was more or less equal—was being eroded. But by what?

The "cycle of capitalism", answered then-Editor-in-Chief Chris Anderson. "A technology is invented, it spreads,a a thousand flowers, bloom, and then someone finds a way to own it, locking out others. It happens every time." The demise of the Web is a story told a thousand times over in modern history. Anderson cites the monopolisation of the railroads and the telephone lines, and the parallels are all too clear (2010). But in the case of the Web, the internet's face is changing into something else altogether. Rather than engaging in conversation through forums or web pages, the predominant mode of social interaction takes place through services and applications; "the rise of machine-to-machine communications—iPhone apps talking to Twitter APIs—is all about control" (Anderson 2010). As the modes and mediums of social interaction change, so do the interactions that take place through them. 

In any discussion of industrial capitalism and its influence, it is obvious to start with Marx. The world which Marx describes in his writing is obviously and markedly different from our own. However, the ideas he elaborated then are absolutely essential to understanding our own society. Marx's themes of alienation, oppression, and conflict are just as relevant today as they were at the time of their printing. By examining the work of later theorists—Gramsci, Baudrillard, and Aglietta, primarily—I hope to tell the story of the smartphone: the slow but unyielding march of industrial capitalism into the world of information technology, and and the ever-more pervasive and complex means by which capitalism objectifies, alienates, and oppresses the individual today. 

As shown in the Introduction, the smartphone is but the latest in a family of technologies. For the purposes of this study, the smartphone will be the focus of our analysis, but many if not all of this work could be applied to other devices and services; tablet computers, online social networks, and the like. While the architects of the modern computer saw it as a tool of empowerment and even liberation, it has been transformed into something altogether more mundane and ordinary. This process and our present relation to information technology was brought about by the confluence of three historical trends as identified by Marx:

*a) the alienation and objectification of the individual*

*b) the redefinition of collective values by capitalist activity*

*c) the consolidation and accumulation of capital*

Despite their being separated, each is thoroughly involved in the development of the others. For the purposes of this study, they are compact distillations of both Marx's work and the themes and theories analysed in this chapter. Marx's specific conceptions and definitions of commodities, objectification, and alienation have largely been rendered obsolete, inasmuch that the nature of production and consumption has been profoundly changed in the past century. However, his work was essential to the later works which better outline our current relationships; with the smartphone, with each other, and with ourselves.

## Americanism, Taylorism, & Fordism

Despite being held as a political prisoner by the Italian Fascist party, Antonio Gramsci was able to analyse and elaborate the enormous changes occurring on the American side of the Atlantic. While Marx had outlined the specific modes of varieties of alienation and exploitation, Gramsci provided a thorough and articulate account of American industry's effects on the worker at the time. After World War I, it was clear the changes taking place in the United States were bleeding over into European culture—the results of which prompted Gramsci's reflections on this potential new epoch of industrial life.

The aristocratic classes—kindly termed "parasites" by Gramsci and his contemporaries—were in a precarious position. The industrial revolution had been kind to the United States, and Europe wished to "have a full barrel and a drunken wife" inasmuch that it wished to match American productive capacity while maintaining its traditional aristocracy and attendant social classes (1971:564). While arguments of the time defended the existing class and social structures, Gramsci made quick work of them; cities across Europe had become rife with marginally productive citizens as consequence of law, custom, or tradition. In contrast, the United States did not have "this leaden burden to support"; something enabled by Weber's Protestant work ethic prevalence across all sections of American society (1971:570). 

In effect, American industry developed in a relative vacuum; the class structures and social conventions of Europe failed to transplant themselves across the Atlantic in the colonial period. While this account is compelling, it is lacking. Handily, a more complete explanation can be found in *A Theory of Capitalist Regulation*, Michel Aglietta's historical analysis of productive capitalist systems through modern history. While the absence of traditional European social forces was essential, so too was the value system which replaced it:

> …the political origins of the American nation, which united petty producers with the commercial and financial bourgeoisie in a common struggle against English colonial rule. This struggle, whose aim was freedom of enterprise, left a permanent mark on the ideological representations of American social relations and created political institutions governed by those general principles that are the legal formalisation of relations of commodity exchange. (Aglietta 1979:73)

In the revolution, there was a fundamental departure from Europe's ways, and capitalism became the sole basis of social organisation. While that theoretical shift took place, the young nation's ideology was also forged: "the frontier principle". The absence of social forms or structures, coupled with capitalist motives, resulted not only in physical and material expansion, but in the creation of new social relations. The generation of surplus-value always began in the commodification of agricultural goods, inevitably led to industrial growth, but continuously broadened the horizons of potential growth. And, when space inevitably ran out, "the industrial bourgeoisie was later able to get the whole of the nation to accept the technological transformations induced by relative surplus-value by presenting these as the building of a 'new frontier'" (1979:76). Though this tactic was established very early in the history of the United States, its is still used to justify economic expansion today—something examined later in this chapter. Undoubtedly, there were periods of struggle—farmer's rebellions, the bloody expansion of the West, and the Civil War, to name several—but the end result was a modern state which was thoroughly oriented around the capitalist activities of growth and expansion (1979:77-78).

It was in the aftermath of the Civil War that the stage was set for the next major development in the capitalist mode of production: Taylorism. Gramsci broadly identified Taylorism as the rearrangement of social labour for additional gains in efficiency and surplus value; Aglietta, however, saw it as a far more fundamental shift which he termed the "domination of commodity relations over non-commodity relations" (1979:81). By this, he meant the entirety of the U.S. experience transitioned to a state of constant and mandatory production and consumption of commodities. Taylorism faded from prominence as ever-more egregious infringements on labourers health and safety made themselves known. Recent immigrants in particular were struck by the gaping chasm between brutally utilitarian practices of Taylorist industrial capitalism and the American ideology of equality and opportunity. Labour movements arose to protest these conditions, but they prompted a swift response from capitalists: the re-imagining of Taylorism into Fordism (Aglietta 1979:113–22). 

General notions of Henry Ford and Fordism are often understood as a mildly naive attempt at inspiring a better morals in the lives of labourers. However, it was the beginning of something else entirely: "the biggest collective effort to date to create, with unprecedented speed, and with a consciousness of purpose unmatched in history, a new type of worker and of man" (1971:597). Gramsci explained:

> It is from this point of view that one should study the "puritanical" initiative of American industrialists like Ford. It is certain that they are not concerned with the "humanity" or the "spirituality of the worker, which are immediately smashed. This "humanity and spirituality" cannot be realised except in the world of production and work and in productive "creation". They exist most in the artisan, in the "demiurge", when the worker's personality was reflected whole in the object created and when the link between art and labour was still very strong. But it is precisely against this "humanism" that the new industrialism is fighting. "Puritanical" initiatives simply have the purpose of preserving, outside of work, a certain psycho-physical equilibrium which prevents the physiological collapse of the worker, exhausted by the new method of production… …It is in their interests to have a stable, skilled labour force, a permanently well-adjusted complex, because the human complex (the collective worker) of an enterprise is also a machine which cannot, without considerable loss, be taken to pieces too often and renewed with single new parts. (Gramsci 1971:599)

Thusly, the American state—already predisposed toward productivity from its founding—joined forces with capitalists to preserve the "worker complex" through prohibition: alcohol, sexual deviance, etc. (Gramsci 1971:600). The Ford Motor Company overreached in its meddling, but Fordism became fully formed in its ability and desire to intervene in the social relations of workers outside the workplace in order to maximise productivity. While Marx had articulated the methods by which the worker was alienated in the capitalist mode of production, those methods were more or less a given. Fordism, however, was a sweeping evolution in its redefinition of the worker as another complex to be tuned and optimised both within and without the workplace. In this development, something of a corollary to the frontier principle was created: expansion is necessary in the maintenance of the productive system, but is beneficial in its improvement in material circumstances. This evolution on Aglietta's principle continues to be used today; again, something examined later in this chapter.

Fordism was the last of the substantial changes to the capitalist mode of production. While the particulars of this transition were unclear to Gramsci—and were later clarified in Aglietta's analysis of the period—he was certain that the old ways would fall in the face of American Fordism. While other thinkers concerned themselves with the "new beacon of civilisation [that] has been lit over there", Gramsci openly derided them and instead stated:

> The problem is not whether in America there exists a new civilisation, a new culture, even if only as a “beacon”, and whether it is invading or has invaded Europe. If the problem were to be posed in that way, the answer would be simple: no, it does not exist, and indeed all that they do in America is to remasticate the old European culture. The problem is rather this; whether America, through the implacable weight of its economic production (and therefore indirectly), will compel or is already compelling Europe to overturn its excessively antiquated economic and social basis." (1971:620-21).

Gramsci recognised it was not a question of cultural dominance—it was the transformation of social relationships to reflect productive capacity. Again, the answer to this question would not become apparent until after Gramsci's passing. Luckily, Aglietta was alive, well, and eminently capable of documenting that answer in detail. 

The American model of production—the continual expansion of industry in materials and scope, and the alignment of state and society around the capitalist mode of production—Aglietta termed a "regime of accumulation" (1979:72). In the aftermath of World War II, Europe was left in ashes. The Fordist regime of accumulation, which was struggling to expand further within the boundaries of the United States—was suddenly offered up new and vacant realms not entirely unlike the lands and peoples of the pre-colonial Americas. Thusly, Fordism transcended its American roots and became the global phenomenon of capitalist production in the modern era.

## Security

And so we understand how the Fordist regime of accumulation became the basis of contemporary Western societies. Aside from a few periods of minor turbulence (e.g. the early labour movement), the Fordist system appears to have faced very little in the way of challenges as it gradually dominated economic and social relations the world over. However, this is not so.

*The Affluent Society*, John Kenneth Gailbrath's critique and analysis of American post-war economics and social relations, is a substantial departure from the work of Aglietta, Marx, or Gramsci. While he acknowledged the importance of Marx's writing in establishing a discourse around capitalism, he was loath to associate himself with Marx's calls for revolution. Instead, Galbraith was an enthusiastic supporter of the Fordist system; however, he understood there were critical challenges facing that regime of accumulation which needed immediate redress. In establishing itself as a world power, both militarily and economically, the United States had achieved levels of wealth theretofore unknown to humanity. While Galbraith would have been one of the last to suggest this newfound wealth was somehow wrong, he did recognise this: "wealth is the relentless enemy of understanding" (1998:1). The United States had achieved dominance as a result of its unique history; but it could not remain to the most pressing problems of the post-war period: security.

Gailbraith understood the security of the Fordist system was threatened. In more conventional Marxist terms, there was an imminent threat of the capitalist mode of production failing to reproduce itself within and beyond the general wage relation which had been established up to that point. The Fordist regime of accumulation had invariably led to crises of accumulation—the depressions of the early 20th century being excellent examples. Aglietta stated, "Every major crisis of accumulation is a crisis of the present conditions of reproduction of this relation" (1979:169). In the American context, over-production had resulted in diminishing surplus-value, prompting vicious cycles which typically necessitated intervention from the state (e.g. the New Deal, state investment in WWII private industry). Gailbraith summarised the dilemma as such: "the preoccupation with production is forced quite genuinely upon us by the tight nexus between production and economic security" (1998:255). While the Fordist system had succeeded in conquering the world it still suffered from flaws which threatened its most fundamental security. This resulted in the following two adaptations: the socialisation of consumption, and the ossification of the Fordist regime of accumulation. It is here that we turn to Baudrillard's observation of these developments within their own time: *The Consumer Society*.

### The Consumer Society

At this point, it becomes necessary to step back and make several meta-theoretical remarks. While this study has focussed primarily on traditional Marxist positions of economic determinism and class conflict, it should be apparent that this framework is slightly reductive and does not fully encompass the  entirety of our current relations to computing technologies and each other. As such, Baudrillard's *The Consumer Society* functions as a vital departure. While many of the terms and concepts typical of Marxist discourse are used liberally throughout, *The Consumer Society* is at its most fundamental a structural-functionalist analysis. Baudrillard had begun his examination of semiotics with *The System of Objects* and continued that work into this particular specimen of his writing. The text suffers from internal inconsistencies—his appeals to traditional Marxist analysis and post-modern semiotics do not quite match up—but Baudrillard successfully progressed the dialogue from conflict between the classes to a discussion of the establishment and reproduction of the systems responsible for a profoundly productive society comprised virtually entirely of consumers. George Ritzer, author of the introduction to the English translation of the text, was right in pointing out “the sense, in this work, both explicitly and implicitly, that production is the base and all else, including consumption and the culture of which it is such an integral part, is superstructure” (Baudrillard 1998: KL 90–91). 

Baudrillard's writing was thoroughly influential on Aglietta; the first half of *A Theory of Capitalist Regulation* focusses on the development of Fordism in a Marxist dialogue of class and production, but virtually all discussion of consumption in the text occurs outside the frame of class conflict. Instead, the socialisation of consumption and the ossification of institutions is very much examined from a broadly macro-sociological perspective.

### The Socialisation of Mass Consumption

While Marx was never able to write at length on consumption, it is obvious he understood its importance. Commodification applied not only to the treatment of the worker, but also the worker's products, and his conception of commodity fetishism was an early attempt at understanding the new world of consumer goods. Aglietta defines consumption much more thoroughly, however. While the alienation and objectification of the worker was a necessary condition for the capitalist mode of production, the formation of a "social norm of working-class consumption" is a means of maintaining that very mode of production (Aglietta 1979:152). 

Prior to Fordism, the primary space of consumption—the home—remained outside the sphere of production, and could not be interfered in by capitalism (1979:156-57). The transition to Fordism also brought about two major developments: standardised housing and transportation. necessities which allowed capitalist influence to extend beyond the previously-demarcated boundaries between work and life. Indeed, as organisations like the extended family were rent apart by the urbanisation characteristic of rapid capitalist development, commodities became increasingly small in scope and were facilitated through the workplace, the home, and transportation: the means of consumption (1979:158–59). It is important to reiterate: these changes were tremendously progressive at first blush; they eliminated many of the hazards of heavy industrial development, but they were very much part of the growing influence the capitalist system maintained outside of the labour exchange. The final result was the socialisation of mass consumption; the production and consumption of commodities in unprecedented numbers to maintain the relation of the worker to the capitalist. 

This process stabilised the productive system in terms of its reproduction of wage relations, but also plated an important role in stabilising the overall structural considerations of the Fordist regime of accumulation. By this, I mean to say the frontier principle was applied in concert with the socialisation of consumption to promote the patterns observed by Veblen (e.g. conspicuous consumption and status through commodity accumulation). By the time of Baudrillard's writing, the consumer society had grown into itself, as he analysed virtually any aspect of the society as being an avenue of social reproduction.

In the transition from purely Marxist analysis, the greatest stumbling block is that of class conflict. How could the struggle between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat be cast off as such? For Baudrillard, that model of class conflict had instead been reinterpreted as structural wealth and structural penury. For rather than relying solely on the wage relation—an economic relationship which had become thoroughly confused by the proliferation of non-production-oriented professions (e.g. teaching, advertising)—the maintenance of a broad middle class, able to consume, necessitated the deprivation of individauls.










### Intro

By Gramsci and Aglietta's analysis, it becomes clear that the capitalism described by Marx had reached maturity by the end of World War II. This maturation can be summed up as such:

1. The alienation and objectification inherent to the capitalist mode of production had reached their most intense and brutal in the widespread adoption of Taylorism in industrial production.
2. Capitalists and the state had fallen into alignment, with an outwardly progressive face (e.g. minimum wage, child labour laws); however, this only reflected the role of production as the basis of all social action.
3. The processes of alienation and objectification were transformed even further with the advent of Fordism, which objectified the worker not only as a source of production labour but also as an end for the consumption of commodities.

Gramsci virtually ignored consumption, but again, Aglietta was equipped with the distance of history to identify the origins of capitalist consumption. We understand that in the development of Fordism, the role of the worker was transforming to that of the consumer. But how did that change take place?


This logic has become rampant in the computing industries, if only inadvertently. "Disrupt yourself, before you are disrupted" has become the mantra of businesses who wish to maintain their profits and dominance. Crises of value accumulation happen alarmingly fast—look to the example of Blackberry, which maintained a highly-successful line of cellphones and early smartphones. With the wild success of the iPhone, consumer conceptions shifted dramatically, and the company now faces near-extinction as it realigns its product lines, internal structures, and relations to the rest of the system.

Technological innovations, often facilitated by the state, became the latest frontier of socialisation and consumption. As was made apparent in the Introduction, the rate of innovation increased dramatically throughout the 20th century: radio, television, and mass communications were suddenly necessary indicators of affluence and well-being. While Aglietta thoroughly described the mechanisms and history of these changes, Jean Baudrillard perhaps better conveyed their nature. His reliance on semiotics throughout *The Consumer Society* is a significant departure from the economically-determinist and basically practical theories offered up by Marx, Gramsci, and Aglietta, but again: it is perhaps a better way of grasping the profundity and strangeness of a consumer society.

Baudrillard regularly called on Marxist terms and arguments to substantiate his critique of consumption, but his argument is largely removed from that frame of analysis. *The Consumer Society* is indeed a strange text; with its foundations in Marxist analysis 

### Baudrillard: Departure from Marxism

- he coined the notion of a means of consumption, but in explaining the dynamics of these relations he relies on late modernist or postmodern semiotics. while a theoretical departure, this is a better fit for the digital, where there is no "material process, is is located in space; it has a specific geography and object-network" (Aglietta 1979:156).

# Discussion 

## Aglietta & Crawford: Concentration & Consolidation

- broadband and cellular consolidation

- social network consolidation





## Greek God Model of Governance

- "The corporation dealt a different kind of blow. The competitive struggle, as a device for separating the strong from the weak, at least had elements of plausibility in the world of the individual entrepreneur. And conceivably the rugged traits which permit of survival in this contest are passed on to strengthen the generations that follow. It is not so easy to apply this reasoning to the case of General Electric or General Motors. THese show marked indications of immortality. (Galbraith 1998:52).

When Peter Ludlow wrote *Our Future in Virtual Worlds*, he was concerned with the particulars of online, virtual communities; something of a far cry from our previous examples of telecommunications giants and smartphones. While his usage of "virtual" is problematic (a microchip is not virtual in any sense; it is real and performs complex math toward a specific end), he does establish a number of extremely effective metaphors for understanding our relationship with the large corporate entities which define most if not all of our everyday experiences with smartphones and other information technologies (Ludlow 2010: KL 35).

While the examples given by Ludlow seem preposterous—self-organised vigilante groups gone mad with power, in-game newspapers writing exposes and eventually being driven out of the game—Ludlow actually articulates one of the more serious problems evident in online communities: dysfunctional governance. At the beginning of the text, he draws clear and deliberate parallels between real-world governments and institutions and virtual Terms of Service and ad-hoc organisations:

> Given all of the things that are virtual or at least partially virtual, it is a short step to ask whether things like states can be virtual too. The answer is that of course they can. Not only can they be virtual, but they already are. You don’t want to confuse the United States government with buildings in Washington DC, or with military hardware, or with the politicians and leaders of the government. These are all important agents in the conduct of governmental activities, but the government itself is a virtual entity that is layered on top of the buildings and hardware and politicians. (Ludlow 2010: KL 36-40)

While we take these institutions for granted in the real world, all that structure is lost in the transition to the virtual. Much like how Gramsci identified the lack of history, custom, or tradition in the United States which allowed it to undergo rapid social reorganisation, online communities lack the structures and institutions necessary for functional social life. As such, these communities are rife with social problems that have no established processes or practices associated with them. Instead, social dysfunction and social life must be directly mediated: a greek god steps in. Not Zeus, but the corporation responsible for the creation and maintenance of that community.

Ludlow uses the term "greek god" very intentionally. Rather than being impartial or well-intentioned, "They reach in and help a friend or take action against an enemy, but for the most part they let their world idly settle into a state of corruption and chaos. When they do take action, they attempt to rewrite the software running the world to solve the problem. But of course most social problems cannot be engineered away" (Ludlow 2010: KL 64-66). While there are Terms of Service and End User License Agreements designed to mediate conflicts, they only apply in the real world; the online community is essentially lawless.

But how does this possibly relate to our current relationships to smartphones and information technologies? Don't we have laws of nature and government which restrict what corporations can and cannot do? Yes, of course, but that does not take this into account: that for the foreseeable future, more and more of our social lives will take place through computers and virtual spaces created by corporations. While redress through real-world institutions can eventually remedy social concerns or injustices, the virtual spaces we inhabit are becoming increasingly distant or abstract from the real world. For example: prior to September 19th, 2012, the default Maps application on Apple Inc. iOS devices was powered by Google Maps. However, due an inability to reach a business agreement between Apple and Google, Apple switched to its own maps system, and all hell broke loose. Apple's service was simply not comparable to Google's, and as a consequence of two companies ending a business agreement, untold thousands of users the world over suffered in ways both large and small.

To return to Ludlow's metaphor, two gods began fighting, and the mere mortals beneath them suffered terribly. While the real-world results in this case may have more or less negligible, this case does illustrate the potential hazards of commoditised and corporate-governed online life. If Apple or Google does not approve of the content of your application, they are free to remove it from their app store. Verizon Wireless can change the conditions of your service at nearly any given moment. Comcast is free to mete out access to competing content services while providing free and easy access to its own. The examples are many and myriad, but the relevant sociological point is this: as social life moves from the real world, governed by public law and common institutions, we are faced with an uneven and irregularly enforced social life. And, speaking to Crawford's earlier arguments, a dystopian future governed by a handful of highly-efficient corporations designed to generate and serve consumers' "needs" suddenly becomes remarkably plausible.

## Examples

- Facebook vs. ADN

- Conspicuous non-consumption

## Conclusion

It does not serve serious academic work to employ scare tactics; it is unlikely that the terrible futures predicted by science fiction writers will become reality any time soon. However, it is clear that the modern corporation is capable of interfering in the lives of its customers/consumers/users more than was ever possible before. With respect to the Marxist analyses conducted earlier in this chapter, it should be immediately apparent that these issues are deserving of immediate and rigorous critique and analysis. While fighting alienation in real world terms is more important than ever, it is essential to keep our eyes forward. The smartphone is a landmark innovation, on the order of the original desktop computers, but is more affordable, accessible, and powerful than any other information technology that has preceded it. Let it be a tool for empowerment, rather than the next realm of objectification, commodification, consumption, and alienation.


## Anil Dash: The Web We Lost