# Chapter One in Brief:

1. Marx established the critical analysis of capitalism: its key concepts, its vocabulary, and its general objectives (to deliver the worker from alienation of all kinds and to eliminate gross inequality).
2. Gramsci then provides a detailed account of Taylorism and its successor, Fordism. Virtually all aspects of American life had been rationalised into a highly productive system unburdened by tradition or history. However, this did not make American culture unique; it was merely a heightened or extended form of European economic practice that had been able to restructure itself via a fresh start.
3. Where Gramsci only made observations and conjectures, Aglietta established a new school of thought to reckon with Fordism's profound impact on society: regulation theory. Furthermore, Aglietta traces the growing role of the corporation in the lives of workers, and the slow concentration and accumulation of wealth—something foreshadowed by Marx's earlier writings.
4. However, it is here that Marx's failure to properly accommodate consumption alongside production becomes apparent. Liberal economists like Galbraith recognise this breakdown and work to establish new theories.
5. Baudrillard provides a new critical lens through "The Consumer Society". The relationships between exchange value, use-value, and utility had broken down entirely. In their stead, Baudrillard suggests that value was estranged from physical realities and instead had become something mostly, if not wholly, subjective. Marx's understanding of commodity fetishism takes on new life as consumptive activity takes on equal, if not greater, importance than productive activity in a post-war and post-scarcity society.
6. Ludlow neatly analogises the new role of corporations as those of greek gods: entities far above and beyond the scope of the worker/consumer, influencing their lives through overt and tacit  techniques. The modulation and control of consumer's experiences with smartphones and computers more broadly is the industrial capitalisation of knowledge work.