## Ludlow: The Greek God Model of Governance

*Ludlow takes these themes into the present with his model of greek gods (corporations) and mortals (users). Launching-off point for examining alienation, oppression, and social life through computers and smartphones.*

Peter Ludlow's *Our Future in Virtual Worlds* is a short essay outlining his concerns with the current trajectory of development in online communities. While his confidence in the form and shape of the coming virtual worlds is misplaced (I am extremely skeptical that the web will have shifted entirely to 3D and interactive environments), his points are based in experience and are pertinent to the growing role of corporate ecosystems in smartphones. Arguing that companies have adopted a "greek god" model of governance and communities are capricious arbiters of justice, Ludlow calls for a new attitude toward transparent and consistent justice online.

Ludlow accustoms the reader to his perspective by exposing "real world" governments as virtual constructs; rather than being real, they are concepts that are generated from individuals, legislation, and policy. What, then, makes online communities any different? Their creators—rather than Enlightenment thinkers or politicians—are created by computer engineers of their own will or at the behest of companies. As a result, virtually all questions of governance have been left at the wayside in favour of externally-oriented and legally-defined Terms of Service and End User License Agreements.

Virtual worlds do not have functional justice systems. The "greek god" style of governance and justice is the haphazard and unfair system intervention by the creator when disputes arise. In the absence of such behaviour, vigilantism takes its place. Individuals or groups will form to defend values or systems as they see fit, but often end up persecuting or bullying fellow citizens of virtual worlds. Both options are utterly opaque and arbitrary, and cause individuals to lose their investment in virtual worlds: be they capital, temporal, or emotional.

I reiterate that Ludlow's argument is unnecessarily reductionist and focused on an edge case. His thought regarding the "greek god" model of governance is essential to this work, however. If the smartphone is an extension of the brain and the self, what are we to make of the corporate ecosystems which determine what smartphones are capable of, and how they may operate? Any number of features of smartphones may be constraints on organic growth, because those features are determined by a corporation under market forces. For example: app stores' guidelines. Rather than allowing software apps to develop new capacities which expand the individual's ability, the blessing of the corporation is necessary to reach the smartphone user.

Rather than considering the ramifications upon the user's rights as expressed through the smartphone, I would argue corporations are fundamentally concerned with their profit and legality while remaining tight-lipped about their internal processes. This leads to uneven and inequitable development in smartphones, and locks the augmented self onto a trajectory pre-determined by financial interests.