## Gramsci: Prison Notebook 22

*Establishes the theory of Fordism and thoroughly critiques the growing American culture of corporate paternalism—a trend that has taken on new life in the digital domain.*

Despite being held as a political prisoner by the Italian Fascist party, Antonio Gramsci was able to analyse and elaborate the enormous changes occurring on the American side of the Atlantic. While Marx had outlined the specific modes of varieties of alienation and exploitation, Gramsci provided a thorough and articulate account of American industry's effects on the worker at the time. After World War I, it was clear the changes taking place in the United States were bleeding over into European culture—the results of which prompted Gramsci's reflections on this potential new epoch of industrial life.

### Americanism and Fordism

Aristocratic classes—kindly termed "parasites" by Gramsci and his contemporaries—were in a precarious position. The industrial revolution had been kind to the United States, and Europe wished to "have a full barrel and a drunken wife" inasmuch that it wished to match American productive capacity while maintaining its traditional aristocracy and attendant social classes (1971:564). While arguments of the time defended the existing class and social structures, Gramsci made quick work of them; cities across Europe had become rife with marginally productive citizens as consequence of law, custom, or tradition. In contrast, the United States did not have "this leaden burden to support"; something evident in Weber's Protestant work ethic prevalence across all sections of American society (1971:570). In effect, American industry developed in a relative vacuum, free to evolve and experiment with new and highly productive relationships between firms and workers.

Rationalism was the new order of the day, and was seized upon by men like Frederick Taylor and Henry Ford. Practices like vertical integration (the stratification and alignment of means of production along one firm's holdings and interests) made leaps and bounds in productivity and efficiency. Unions and skilled labour were subverted by the attractive wages and benefits that were offered by those improvements. Gramsci realised that the factory had become the epicentre of a new hegemony, where "the whole life of the nation revolve[d] around production" (1971:571).

As factory activity became the centre of productive life after World War I, *present complaints of "work-life imbalance" are rendered pathetic.* Rather than simple attempts at "puritanism", Gramsci made it clear that firms' invasion of workers' private lives was the manifestation of something else entirely: "the biggest collective effort to date to create, with unprecedented speed, and with a consciousness of purpose unmatched in history, a new type of worker and of man" (1971:597). He continues:

> "It is from this point of view that one should study the "puritanical" initiative of American industrialists like Ford. It is certain that they are not concerned with the "humanity" or the "spirituality of the worker, which are immediately smashed. This "humanity and spirituality" cannot be realised except in the world of production and work and in productive "creation". They exist most in the artisan, in the "demiurge", when the worker's personality was reflected whole in the object created and when the link between art and labour was still very strong. But it is precisely against this "humanism" that the new industrialism is fighting. "Puritanical" initiatives simply have the purpose of preserving, outside of work, a certain psycho-physical equilibrium which prevents the physiological collapse of the worker, exhausted by the new method of production… …It is in their interests to have a stable, skilled labour force, a permanently well-adjusted complex, because the human complex (the collective worker) of an enterprise is also a machine which cannot, without considerable loss, be taken to pieces too often and renewed with single new parts." (Gramsci 1971:599)

Thusly, state and society adjusted to eliminate that which might deteriorate the "worker complex" through prohibition: alcohol, sexual deviance, etc. (1971:600). Although the desire to preserve workers would take on new dimensions in the coming decades—something explained later in this paper by Aglietta and Baudrillard—this same sentiment has persevered to the present day.

### A Society Transformed

Gramsci openly wondered if the changes wrought by Ford and Taylor could be carried out across an entire society; a question that was most certainly answered during and after World War II. The whole of American society was transformed by the moral obligations of a war overseas, while government facilitated the growth of business. Fordism had perhaps overreached in its meddling with the lives of its workers, but it had set a powerful precedent—one still observed through programs like mandatory drug tests and voluntary pedometers in minimum-wage positions. Gramsci had also clearly articulated how a system such as Taylorism acted out Marx's four modes of alienation—and how thoroughly that system had formed the basis of productive activity moving forward. 

Mocking Pirandello's claims that a new civilisation had been born in America, Gramsci instead focuses on the United State's sheer productive capacity; "whether America, through the implacable weight of its economic production (and therefore indirectly), will compel or is already compelling Europe to overturn its excessively antiquated economic and basis" (1971:620-21). It is here that Gramsci makes his vies clear: that the underlying culture of American was still very much European, but a new and highly productive economic system was changing its face to something far more intense in its involvement in and alienation of the worker.

With respect to the present, his questions and predictions were prescient. American society was free of history and tradition after World War I, but the profound changes in American life brought about by World War II were plenty to generate the traditions and customs he found so loathsome in Europe. However, rather than aristocracy or new social strata, this history manifested itself in the new practices and expectations of economic activity; the balance of work and leisure; and the profoundly paternal role of the firm in the worker's life. And as the United States took its place as a global superpower, society and economic activity transitioned to preservation, rather than propulsion (Gramsci 1971:583). While Gramsci would die in prison before America fully subsumed European economic systems, his observations would make themselves clear to later thinkers such as Aglietta and Baudrillard—that American activity was "an organic extension and an intensification of European civilisation, which has simply acquired a new coating in the American climate" (1971:622).

**Important themes: (corporative) systems, as they take on history, transition to preservation rather than propulsion (583). In the case of industry and technology, monopolisation and consolidation has become the norm. In American and Fordist culture, caste systems arose due to surplus value and productive capacity among ruling classes (603). Surplus value and productive capacity inevitably result in castes—though in the American context, labour saving devices created a large consumer class that was still reasonably productive (shifting the lower castes of society out of the U.S. into a global context). That said, change is still possible (even the most tightly swathed baby managed to develop and grow) (584).**

