# Interview Sample

It is perhaps best to begin by describing the population solicited. While soliciting participants via Facebook alone might have been a somewhat unorthodox decision, it did offer a number of broad statistics which would have been otherwise unavailable. One failing, however, was this: I was under the impression that Facebook recorded certain statistics in the event's metadata (e.g. total number of individuals invited to the event), when in fact, it did not. As such, some of those descriptive statistics were lost, but others were measured after the interview process had concluded. While not directly pertinent to the hypotheses discussed above or the goals of this study, I do think they do merit brief discussion.

The initial group of participants solicited was comprised of approximately forty friends and close acquaintances, roughly balanced by gender and gender and age. As was mentioned in the chapter previous, more than one-hundred participants had expressed interest in the event as the original group snowballed outward. From this point onward, an definite trend emerged: the predominance of females throughout the rest of the research process. Of the forty-nine who marked themselves as attending, only twelve identified as male. Similarly, only six males posted their narratives, while the remaining twenty-one participants were all female. While this has a direct bearing on the interviews and resulting data—in that the final sample was overwhelmingly female—it also indicates significant gendering [gendering? not sure of appropriate terminology.] of behaviours within online social spaces. Again, that question and any relevant hypotheses are outside the scope of this study and cannot be compared to any of the research already examined (other than, perhaps, Turkle's conceptualisations of "hard" and "soft" mastery of technology), but it indicates a realm of phenomena ripe for study.

But for the purposes of this study, it had the following effect: a substantial over-sampling of females over males in the final sample. Of the interviews conducted, only a third of the participants were male. While problematic at first blush, I saw it as an opportunity to broaden the research beyond my own experiences within "nerd" culture through conversation within the interviews. Indeed, the only "expert" participant—the participant who had published writing related to his technology diet—was, unsurprisingly, a white male. But along those lines of homogeneity, the entire sample self-identified as white/caucasian. This could not be so easily reinterpreted as a blessing disguised as a curse. To this, I can only suggest this: such are the dangers of convenience and snowball sampling. Unconscious bias, either through the viral spread of the event's invitations, or on my part through the solicitation and contact process, resulted in such a racially homogenous sample. Analysing the causes for this are well outside the scope of this study, but it merits serious discussion—something addressed later in the Conclusion.

*Of the ten participants from the college, there was a typical degree of diversity in terms of socioeconomic background, despite the lack of racial diversity in the sample. Participants' parents' educations ranged from high school degrees to doctorates, though most had achieved Bachelor's or Master's degrees. Participants were not asked about their socioeconomic backgrounds directly; they were asked about their status regarding financial aid and work/study programs as a proxy, with participants self-describing across all of the available categories.*

When research was concluded, eleven interviews had been conducted. Of that number, eleven were "normal" computer users; students of The College of Wooster, all had self-described themselves as reasonably technologically proficient. The remaining one participant was my sole "expert" respondent—one of those who had announced their intentions to undertake a "technology diet" and had documented their experiences publicly. To reiterate: though they had published publicly about their experiences, it was made clear in our initial contact that his anonymity would be protected, so as to encourage the sharing of any details not fit for public consumption. Throughout this analysis, each of these respondents will be referred to by pseudonym. To protect their privacy and anonymity, particular details have been changed or omitted within standard and reasonable expectation.

# Analysis

Listed in the previous chapter, three hypotheses informed the how the interviews were designed and conducted. However, as I coded and analysed the data, four themes made themselves apparent. In this section, each of these themes will be analysed and discussed with respect to the theories already examined in this study. While participants had data relevant to each section, some of their responses were more poignant or relevant to specific themes at hand. *First, the broad narratives and backgrounds of the participants will be examined.* Then, each of the recurring themes will be discussed with respect to variety of experiences had by the participants. Once each of these themes has been established and discussed, only then will we evaluate each of the three hypotheses mentioned prior. 

Despite the variation in participants' backgrounds, their personal narratives around technology were astoundingly similar.  While specific circumstances varied, 

## A Broad Narrative

The first interview conducted was with the "expert" participant, Chris. Chris, born in 1986, is substantially older than the rest of the sample—a full three years older than the next-eldest participant, and five years older than the sample average. Unsurprisingly, many of the specifics of his experiences and interactions with technology differed from those of the rest of the sample. But throughout research process, his narrative of technology adoption became the predominant narrative across all participants—albeit with slight differences in relative age. 

For either business or pleasure, the family would purchase a home computer from the ages of six to eight—quickly followed by the introduction of computers into their schools. Computers at home were used primarily for games, either educational or recreational, while computers at school were used in the fourth, fifth, and sixth grades for typing classes and small research projects. Fascinatingly, virtually all of the participants—with the exception of Chris—were unable to remember the first time they used the Internet. In Chris' case, his first experience was in school for a research project; but for the rest of the participants, the Internet had more or less always been around in school or in the home. While the "digital native" descriptor is typically used hyperbolically, it would appear that there is some truth at its root. When asked if he remembered his first experiences using a computer or using the Internet, Ernesto—the youngest participant of the sample—responded: 

> "No, I just… in my mind, it's always been a thing. I don't remember, like, you know the first time I really used a computer, I don't remember the first time I really used the Internet; it's just something that I've just become… it's just second nature. I remember the exciting transition from dial-up Internet, I don't know…"

For this generation, and the generations following it, a world without global telecommunications or the Internet may as well have never existed.

Following these early experiences with computers came the cellphone. As if preordained, every participant received a cellphone at the ages of fourteen or fifteen for the explicit purpose contacting parents—again, with the exception of Chris, who received his at the age of sixteen. From this point onward, the narrative becomes broader: participants received or purchased their own computers either in the later years of high school or in preparation for college, and new cellphones were purchased according to personal preference and circumstances like service contracts, accidents, etc. Smartphone adoption across the sample was in line with recent estimates mentioned in the Introduction—about seventy percent market saturation—but none of the respondents were without phones, and even expressed mild horror at the prospect.

## Computer Education & Early Childhood

Perhaps the clearest point of comparison between Turkle's findings and my own is childhood and computer education. To say the transformation in computer education and interaction between 1984 and the late 90's was radical would be an enormous understatement. Most of the schools Turkle observed only had a few computers: "one or perhaps two computers per grade. In a few, every classroom had at least one computer." (2005:93). However, a private school she called "Austen" quickly became a primary focus for her analysis. At Austen, students were given unlimited access to computers—a decision made very intentionally. Turkle summarised: "This is not a school that "brought in some computers," but a school that created conditions for the growth of a computer culture. The intention was to simulate a future where computers would be everyday objects in the life of the child." (2005:94). Indeed, the other schools studied could not afford such a large number of computers and relied on traditional pedagogic relationships between teachers and children, but the underlying assumptions were the same: computers were the future, and they would be everywhere. As such, children needed to understand the essentials of programming through simple code languages like BASIC, PILOT, and Logo (2005:93). 

Those underlying assumptions could not have been more wrong. While all the participants reported their schools as having large numbers of computers—either in classrooms or in specialised computer labs—the intent and structure of computer education had changed. When Turkle originally published her findings, the revolution in computing user interfaces was just about to begin with the introduction of the Macintosh. In a few short years, knowledge of programming would be eliminated as a prerequisite for computer use. Introducing the revised edition in 2005, she summarised these changes as such:

> "Schoolchildren learning to program under innovative educational initiatives of twenty years ago, such as Deborah, are among this book's central actors. So, too, is a vibrant culture of personal computer owners who built and bought home computers for the joy of understanding how they worked. But in today's cultural mainstream, these actors are no longer with us. The socially shared activity of computer programming and hardware tinkering has been displaced by playing games, participation in online chat and blogs, and using applications software out of the box." (2005:5)

Of the participants interviewed for this study, all described their early experiences in the classroom as such: research projects and typing classes, with the most complex projects consisting of designing simple websites. Debby, a female participant whose father had owned a computer for several years, recalled one of her earliest experiences in the classroom:

> "For whatever reason, I was… I had a really weird fourth grade teacher. He wanted us to be creating some really, really basic website… And I just remember the concept of copying and pasting, like, hyperlinks was difficult for me… and that I didn't quite understand what the point was."

To members of our generation, being that young and having a problem copying and pasting text is unsurprising—perhaps even a source of sympathy. But it clashes jarringly with the students Turkle observed only fifteen years before. In discussing the behaviours and phenomena surrounding child programmers, Turkle begins with Robin. Robin, four years old and in a nursery school, is described as "playing a game that allows her to build stick figures by commanding the computer to make components appear and move into a desired position. The machine responds to Robin's commands and tells her when it does not understand an instruction." (2005:91). But unlike the computer games of the 90's, Robin was able to do all this by typing commands into the machine, rather than pointing and clicking—a stunning contrast to Debby's experience.

As powerful as Turkle's conceptualisation of the computer as an evocative object was at the time, it seems to have been diminished. With respect to the narrative established in Chapter One, the introduction of the GUI transformed the experience of using a computer. It was a double-edged sword: while the GUI lowered the bar of entry to using a computer by reducing the complexity of its operation, it inadvertently made it more difficult for children and adolescents to experiment or express themselves. While teachers were no longer so easily outsmarted by their students, applications and programs designed for specific purposes instituted hard limits on their usage—resulting in the goal-oriented and productively-minded computer classes meant to teach basic skills and nothing more. In many ways, the experience of using a computer was refocussed through the adult context:

> "Adults are more settled. In the worst of cases, they are locked into roles, afraid of the new, and protective of the familiar. Even when they are open to change, established ways of thinking act as a braking force on the continual questioning so characteristic of children… Some people are intimidated by computers and keep their distance. Others see them merely "as a tool" and assimilate them into their nine-to-five life." (2005:155).

And so, by the time these participants had reached middle and high school, computers had largely been rendered as means for either consumption of media (predominantly video games) or production (school assignments).

## The Global Village and Contemporary Telecommunications

In *The Gutenberg Galaxy*, Marshall McLuhan was remarkably successful in predicting the the conditions brought on by global telecommunications and the Internet. McLuhan resolved that while technology has a profound role in shaping our perspectives and selves, it was altogether neutral with no specific moral agenda. In *Alone Together*, that assertion was reaffirmed, albeit with decidedly mixed results. For Turkle, the most poignant example of the intersection of omnipresent networks and social life was found in observing her own daughter abroad. Rather than taking in the sights of new cultures and places "undiluted" as Turkle did in her youth, her daughter was constantly tethered to her friends and peers from home via her cellphone (2010:156).

While Turkle was distraught at these constant ties to the familiar, her daughter was happy—she was glad to be in touch with friends. In this respect, Turkle's daughter and the participants of this study are very much in agreement. The college has placed a not-insubstantial emphasis on study abroad and international experiences, resulting in a well-traveled student body—including several of the participants. When asked what was the best experience she had ever had with technology, Debby responded immediately that it was the ability to call her parents via Skype and other communication services when abroad. Elaborating on her response, she explained that despite the associated expenses and difficulties (e.g. pay-as-you-go Internet, unreliable connections), it was a huge asset. 

Debby spent a month as the only non-resident in an isolated village, and Internet and cellular services were her only connection to her program or her peers in the country. The community was conservative, and so she ended up alone in her room from sundown until the following morning—feeling isolated and cut off. At those times, her laptop—her lifeline—was not only a way to pass the time, but to stay socially active through social networks and online media. Others reported similar senses of relief at these technological tethers to home. Another participant, Florence, spent a semester in one of India's rapidly-growing city centres, working and studying alongside her Indian peers, and spent the majority of each day in their company. Even then, she was relieved to have access to social networks and telecommunications to maintain the long-distance relationship she was in.

In a marked contrast from Turkle's observations and misgivings over staying in constant contact with her daughter abroad, both Debby and Florence showed strong enthusiasm for their ability to stay in touch with their parents and families. For both, letters would have been completely impractical as a means of staying in touch, and both related a deep sense of relief that their parents shared. Florence had never traveled out of the country before, and found the connections to have assuaged not only her parents' fears but her own anxieties about travelling. 

But given Turkle's work, these scenarios beg the question: would these anxieties and feelings have existed thirty or forty years ago? Are these needs to commune with the global electronic brain somehow instilled by technology—an addiction enabled? That is unclear, as the sense of relief was universal across the participants who spent time abroad. 

While these means and modes of connection took on particular significance in the international context, they were just as important in the domestic—if not altogether more mundane. Although Debby had described herself as decidedly not proficient with technology, it had been essential to communication from an early age. Her father travelled often and for extended periods in remote locations, and so email became the only reliable means of communication. Indeed, she remembered setting up her own email account with her mother's help in the third grade, so as to maintain a friendship she had made while visiting her grandmother on the opposite coast of the country. 

The maintaining of friendships almost exclusively through these devices and services is virtually second nature for some. Ernesto, for whom the internet had always been a present fact, remarked as such:

> "A lot of the time people criticise we're so disconnected, we hide behind screens all the time. But at the same time, like, I'm still every bit as good of friends with people that I haven't seen in like a year because I keep in constant communication with them through something like a computer or something like a phone."

The nature of these always-on, never-present relationships appears to have taken very little of a toll: Ernesto spoke earnestly and excitedly. Although his familiarity with technology had put him into the role of resource for his less-proficient peers—something he expressed mild irritation over—he still saw those troubleshooting sessions as a means of interaction and communication.

Not all of the participants were so forgiving. Joyce, who did not own a smartphone and saw very little reason to do so, expressed frustration over the particularities of texting. Instead, she strongly preferred to make phone calls, if only briefly—an experience resonant with Turkle's findings regarding the marginalization of the phone. In a culture which places so much emphasis on text-based communication, there is for some a sense of nostalgia given communication through the voice. Joyce had grown tired of long text exchanges which conveyed neither message nor meaning. As such, the short, perfunctory phone call had become her default. While she had found it caused occasional rifts, as few of her peers expected phone calls, she was ultimately happy with the result: clear and nuanced conversations. Other participants expressed feelings in the same vein toward text-based communication—that it was a flawed medium, but was so convenient.

Turkle roots this preference for text in the strong emphasis placed on multitasking in our culture today, but fails to go any further than that: something we might remedy with the narrative of production and consumption we have already established. Communication with the voice takes time and effort, both of which are not conducive to the perceived productivity of juggling countless tasks simultaneously. But, in fact, none of the conversations that took place between myself and the participants ventured into relative productivity and multitasking; there was either tacit guilt over not being able to focus properly, or unmitigated enthusiasm for being able to juggle tasks so "efficiently".

## Access & Addiction

In becoming part of the noosphere of global telecommunications, there is the acquisition of the smartphone (or any other networked device). Either as a means of production/consumption, or as an external organ, the smartphone and its equivalents have become essential to the participants' everyday functions. Oscar travels frequently, and described his smartphone as "essential".  But while the ability to stay in touch with friends and family was important to Oscar, it was his access to information. When looking for accommodations, travel arrangements, or coordinating with others, his smartphone had become essential—an extension of himself in thought and action.

Truly, we are all cyborgs now. Turkle's graduate student cyborgs have become us all, as the phones in our pockets become the fulcrum point of the majority of our daily actions. For those like Helene and Nadine, who had recently transitioned from feature phones to smartphones, the experience was transformative. Throughout the interviews I had with them, the references to newfound ease and convenience in accessing friends and information formed a steady beat. But, as with the newfound ability to phone home from anywhere in the world, has the desire to do so been constructed? As Kelly asked, do the things the technology wants line up with what we want?

At first blush, it would seem so. Helene, Nadine, and Oscar were all pleased with the capabilities these devices had afforded them. But in discussion, a strange dichotomy emerged: a strong enthusiasm for these devices and technologies, but a deep awareness of how they might be influencing social life adversely. Ernesto, who earlier mentioned lives spent in front of screens, had attempted the technology fasts which Turkle proposed, but found himself hopelessly lost in his smartphone's thrall "within I think an hour after that generalisation [of leaving technology behind] I'm just like, 'What? Did I say I was gonna stop using my Facebook? Oh, ah, uh, well, cellphone…' It's right there, and it's something to do when you're bored."

In many, if not most, of the interviews, the language of addiction was used liberally. Turkle traces this to the minute jolts of satisfaction or pleasure that come from using smartphones, which offer virtually infinite stimulation for those like Ernesto who "feel bored". Turkle sees this in terms of the individual: "If there is an addiction here, it is not to a technology. It is to the habits of mind that technology allows us to practice" (2010:288). But the most powerful experience shared with my in my research came from Chris.

Chris, as has been mentioned several times, was the "expert" participant, as he had already ousted himself online as someone who had experimented with technology fasts. These experiments have taken on various forms throughout the years, but the moment of clarity came in his first years of college. Chris was addicted to online pornography. He had gotten a single room in his school's housing lottery, and it was his first experience with broadband Internet. He did not describe it as a result of the salaciousness of the practice, but a result of convenience, of unmitigated access. Over time, however, Chris considered himself lucky: he saw that he was changing, or his relationships with others were shifting imperceptibly as a result. He was hesitant to describe these problems in detail, but his account of this experience was moving. It had been painful not only to go through, but to recover from. He eventually turned to friends, a decision he was thankful for. 

Interestingly, he did not blame himself, nor did he blame the computer, or the Internet for that experience. Although he felt it was unhealthy and in some ways wrong, his narrative was decidedly value-free in describing the various social actors involved. SImply, he felt, he had had too much access—which, when dealing with media designed to be consumed, was a dangerous combination. But by establishing rules, and by establishing frameworks, he felt confident in walking away from that. Since, he has experimented at length with limiting various technologies and mediums—most recently, his beloved smartphone. 

Where he had once been thrilled by the opportunities offered by the pocket computer—apps, media, and communications in a sleek and refined package—he suddenly saw himself as fundamentally distracted. Chris recently had had a child, and in spending time with her, he found his first response during particularly precious moments was not to relish it, but to reach for the phone's camera. For him, it was a troubling disconnect which finally lead him to replacing it with a dumbphone.

That particular experiment soon ended. After only several months, the excision of his smartphone had left a distinct hole in his life. Actions necessary for both work and home life now faced additional layers of abstraction: looking up a phone number on the computer, making the call on the dumbphone, returning to the computer to write a follow-up email. He ultimately returned to his smartphone, but with significant rules and restrictions; upon returning home from work, it would go on the mantlepiece, in silent mode, and there it would stay until needed.

Chris' experience was markedly different than those of the other participants, both in severity and self-awareness. As was mentioned earlier, Chris is significantly older—so his ability to cope with these difficulties might be a function of maturity. But there were glimmers of these behaviours in the younger participants. Oscar, though he relies on his smartphone constantly, regularly leaves it behind as he engages in exercise—to establish time and space free of the demands of others or his devices. For those with smartphones, there was either dim awareness of these changes; or a response commensurate with Turkle's teenage daughter shrugging noncommittally. These are simply the times we live in, they would say. 

Those without smartphones, however, were decidedly skeptical and relied on the language of addiction to explain those feelings. Joyce, while she did not have a smartphone, felt she spent entirely too much time on Facebook and admitted to feeling rather helpless and frustrated, despite being fully able to walk away from the service to engage in other activities. In sum, the range of responses to the extension of the body and mind has elicited a wide range of responses both in emotional experience and pragmatic process. Turkle expresses hope in the ability of future generations to establish coping mechanisms, like those exhibited by Oscar and Chris, but not with much hope.

## Commodification, Consumerism, & Google Glass

As decidedly mixed as those feelings of addiction were, I personally found myself disappointed in this: the absolute lack of awareness surrounding the particulars of the systems in which the participants are embedded—not just social or physical, but economic. In essence, the narrative of Fordism and consumerism was virtually nonexistent. When asked of what they thought smartphones might look like in the future, some participants expressed their hopes for additional capabilities or technical specifications (e.g. larger screens, faster processors) while others more broadly interpreted the market forces at play (phones were getting smaller and smaller, but now it seems like it's fashionable to have bigger and bigger phones). But most troubling of my findings came in my conversation with Kirk.

Kirk is a self-professed lover of science, technology, and information. He is particularly a fan of a fan page on Facebook, which publishes daily interesting or exciting discoveries in science. He does not own a smartphone, or any particularly complex devices, but is fascinated by them and is thrilled by the progress and innovations of the past several years in mobile computing. But when asked the question of what smartphones might look like in the future, his response was immediate: Google Glass. Glass, a device worn on the head which responds to voice commands and uses a camera and a small screen to present and record data, was amazing to Kirk, and a vision of the future because all of the data available to Google would be available to him all the time, anywhere. Furthermore, he was thrilled at the possibility of being able to access and interact with data and notifications without cuing anyone around him that he was doing so: in effect, becoming the cyborg of his dreams.

But as we discussed Glass, I began to press him about the implications of it being made by Google: that all the queries were passed through their servers and the like. And his immediate response was redoubled enthusiasm, and in a direction I would not have anticipated: he liked Google for serving him ads. Kirk proceeded to articulate all the ways in which Google was merely using ads as a means of making the world a better place, by making all data available to him, anywhere. Any of my questions regarding privacy or security were thrown out the window, because Google simply wanted to "make the world a better place".

While his optimism was inspiring, it was extremely troubling in the face of the critical analysis conducted earlier. Other participants mentioned Glass in passing, and expressed befuddlement or skepticism, but none other than Kirk identified consumerism not only as a powerful motive force, but ultimately a force for his and others' own good.

## Hypotheses & Conclusion

*Brief analysis of each of the hypotheses and where they were correct and incorrect. Followed by a short conclusion detailing on how the smartphone is a profound enabler shaped by outside forces, but is ultimately a sort of rorschach test through which humans might express themselves. This, and other themes/suggestions, are elaborated in the Conclusion chapter.*

### 

### 

### 